7.6  Conclusion

We've collected the most pertinent evidence and invented Bayes factors for each of them, so
it is time to make a grand total.
evidence Bayes log-odds
⟦1⟧ prior 1.88235 0 .63
⟦2⟧ outbreak at HSM 1/10000 -9.2
⟦3⟧ 12 nct insert at FCS 20 3
⟦4⟧ ACE2 affinity 2 0 .69
⟦5⟧ secret doesn't leak 1/10 -2.3
⟦6⟧ total 0.001255 -7.19
⟦7⟧ which gives a conditional probability of
P (LL|O) = 0.07529%
Note that in this table I have combined observations differently from how either of the debate
participants did; in particular most of the evidence involving DEFUSE, some of the genetic
evidence, and the fact that the outbreak started in Wuhan are all baked into the prior. This
is why the prior is so favorable to LL even though most pandemics are zoonotic in origin. I
prefer this to using a prior for outbreaks globally and narrowing to Wuhan-specific, as the
latter would introduce unnecessary errors in calculating the global GoF lab leak rate when
all I need is the rate in Wuhan.
⟦8⟧ Do I believe the probability of a lab leak is only 1 in 1300? No, due to the significant
uncertainties in my analysis I would give it some higher probability. Many of the components
in my calculation should be dampened towards neutrality to account for the uncertainty in
them.71 However I was at times quite conservative, by my estimation, in favor of lab leak,
so I would not shift the final probability much more than I have already; and no amount of
dampening towards neutrality can make the probability cross the 50% line.
Moreover I am not convinced that this Bayesian calculation is even an appropriate way
to estimate the relative posterior probability of Z and LL; it just seemed fair that after
criticizing Rootclaim's calculations at length I should make an attempt at it myself.
I think the numerical calculation gives an undeserved illusion of certainty, so I prefer perhaps
a more qualitative summary:
71Most obviously the 1/10000 factor sticks out as needing significant dampening; however it is the only
factor that is actually based on calculating something, has much higher confidence than the others, and has
already been dampened by a factor of 2.
evidence strength
prior lean zoonotic
location strong zoonotic
genetic / DEFUSE weak lab leak
secret doesn't leak weak zoonotic
total strong zoonotic
Here I have broken down the observations differently, better according to how they align
with my intuition; some of the evidence previously included in the prior has been moved to
location and genetic / DEFUSE. Notice this qualitative assessment is barely consistent with
the numbers I gave before, as my intuitive feel for the evidence favors Z more strongly than
the numbers did.
It is worthwhile to at least briefly consider whether my selection of evidence is sensible or
motivated. I have excluded quite a few items mentioned by Rootclaim; not that this would
impact the result, as I evaluate each of the excluded items as indistinguishable from neutral.
My basis for including evidence is loosely if it is either an essential component of the zoonotic
/ lab leak hypotheses, or if it is quite strong. The location of the outbreak qualifies on all three
counts (really, it'd be crazy to ignore where the outbreak started when trying to evaluate
how it started). The genetic information and DEFUSE proposal are included as they are
inseparably tied to the lab leak hypothesis. Finally, I included the failure of the secret to
escape the lab as it is strong evidence (as ⟦9⟧ I gave it 1 / 64 before conservatively adjusting the
Bayes factor to 1 / 10), and arguably an essential "step" in the lab leak theory. 72
One piece of evidence I excluded was the distribution of positive environmental samples
within HSM. While it appears to identify the origin of the HSM outbreak to be specifically the
area where wild animals were kept, this particular evidence was not an essential component
of the zoonotic hypothesis, nor was it so convincingly strong in isolation as to not possibly
be a coincidence.
I have an alternative, less Bayesian, approach to thinking about the lab leak hypothesis. The
centerpiece of the lab leak explanation is the Project DEFUSE proposal, and the observation
that a number of features from that proposal match features of sars-cov-2:
• Sars-cov-2 first appeared in Wuhan, the same city as one of the labs involved in
DEFUSE
• Sars-cov-2 has an FCS that looks artificially inserted when compared to banal-52
• Sars-cov-2 has a strong affinity to human ACE2
• Something about N-linked glycans
72Conversely, the lack of a known intermediate host for sars-cov-2 could be analogously considered an
essential "step" to the zoonotic theory; I don't mention it as I find this evidence indistinguishable from
neutral.
This is sufficient to raise suspicion: how odd to see so many specific details identified in ad-
vance of the pandemic!73 But the zoonotic hypothesis has an equivalent to Project DEFUSE,
namely Eddie Holmes's 2014 photos [26]. It is a remarkable coincidence that, when searching
for potential zoonotic spillover sites, the Wuhan CDC took him to HSM, specifically to the
very shop 6:29 which had the greatest number of positive environmental samples (and whose
owner was fined for selling illegal wildlife). This coincidence of location is likewise odd, and
has no explanation under LL.
Figure 11: Photographs of shop 6:29 in HSM taken by Eddie Holmes in 2014. Photographs
are from [39].
Neither the existence of the Project DEFUSE proposal nor the Eddie Holmes photos are
definitive, or even strong, evidence as to the origin of sars-cov-2; they rise only to the stan-
dard of being odd, possibly just coincidences. However, Project DEFUSE is the only signif-
icant evidence suggesting the possibility of a GoF lab leak. ⟦10⟧ Looking through the Bayesian
calculation presented by Rootclaim, the remaining pieces of evidence they give a Bayes factor
larger than 2 are CGGCGG , no known intermediate animal host, and "adjust for BSL-2", ⟦11⟧ none
of which I think are distinguishable from a Bayes factor of 1.
While the lab leak hypothesis has only loose circumstantial evidence in its favor, the physical
evidence of the covid pandemic starting in the immediate vicinity of live animals susceptible
to sars-like coronaviruses and the precedent of previous coronavirus epidemics starting in an
analogous manner together point strongly in favor of the hypothesis of zoonotic spillover.
73Though, the zoonotic hypothesis has a neat explanation: these details were identified because they were
known to be relevant to pandemics.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ [QUANTITATIVE_RESULT] Prior probability of 1.88235
⟦2⟧ [QUANTITATIVE_RESULT] Bayes factor of -9.2 for outbreak at HSM
⟦3⟧ [QUANTITATIVE_RESULT] Bayes factor of 3 for 12 nct insert at FCS
⟦4⟧ [QUANTITATIVE_RESULT] Bayes factor of 0.69 for ACE2 affinity
⟦5⟧ [QUANTITATIVE_RESULT] Bayes factor of -2.3 for secret doesn't leak
⟦6⟧ [QUANTITATIVE_RESULT] Total Bayes log-odds of -7.19
⟦7⟧ [QUANTITATIVE_RESULT] Conditional probability of P(LL|O) = 0.07529%
⟦8⟧ [QUANTITATIVE_RESULT] Probability of lab leak of 1 in 1300
⟦9⟧ [QUANTITATIVE_RESULT] Original Bayes factor of 1/64 for secret doesn't leak
⟦10⟧ [QUANTITATIVE_RESULT] Bayes factor of 2 as threshold for significant evidence
⟦11⟧ [QUANTITATIVE_RESULT] Bayes factor of 1 for CGGCGG, no known intermediate animal host, and 'adjust for BSL-2'
