1.1  Background: what happened in Wuhan?

A butterfly with the flap of its wings is said to change the path of a hurricane on the other
side of the Earth. 3 There is no better exemplar of the butterfly effect than the beginnings
of a pandemic: a single cough, or sneeze, a decision to go to work or see a friend, and the
lives of 10 million people swing in the balance.
Inevitably the earlier one tries to trace the origins of covid-19, the narrower the trail, until
it is reduced to the mundane daily activities of a handful of individuals whose identities may
be lost to time.
The farthest back we have been able to follow the trail is to the city of Wuhan, a massive
metropolis of 12 million people 4 in the Chinese province Hubei. On 2019 December 26 or 27,
at the height of flu season,5 Dr Zhang Jixian6 examined two patients whose unusual CT scan
reminded her of her experience with the SARS-1 outbreak of 2002-2003; she is generally
recognized as the discoverer of covid-19, thanks to her prompt and appropriate response.
Near this time, other healthcare workers began to notice a pattern of pneumonia cases and
likewise leapt to action.
On December 30, an emergency notice circulated amongst Wuhan hospitals regarding 27
hospitalized patients with pneumonia of unknown cause, at least some of whom were associ-
3This is true, if you mean a hurricane at least two weeks in the future, which is approximately the time
scale over which the weather is chaotic.
4bigger than any city in the US or west Europe, by some definitions
5The average US adult has a 10% chance of catching the flu each winter, and catches 0.5 to 2 colds a year,
so one figures that concurrent with the beginnings of covid there were on the order of one million people in
Wuhan with the flu, of which ten thousand hospitalized.
6at the Hubei Provincial Hospital of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine, a grade 3A tertiary
hospital
ated with the Huanan 7 Seafood Wholesale Market (hereafter "HSM") in downtown Wuhan.
Around this time government officials began to become involved, in many ways interfering
with the actions of healthcare professionals. HSM was sanitized and closed the morning of
January 1, and samples were collected on and after January 1 [22, 12].
On 2020 January 20, the Chinese National Health Commission announced confirmation of
human-to-human transmission of covid-19 to multiple healthcare workers; significant evi-
dence of human-to-human transmission existed before this time. On January 23 Wuhan
entered lockdown and China invested heavily in tracking and curtailing covid, successfully
containing it by April. Covid would remain under control with increasing difficulty until
omicron made China's "zero covid" policy impossible to maintain. 8

(no claims extracted for this section)
