3.1  "Animal" vs "Other"

As an example of a Bayesian calculation that fails to persuade me, let us look at the calcu-
lation presented by Rootclaim in session 1 to contrast two hypotheses labeled "Animal" and
"Other". ([1] at 3:05:45)
The goal of their argument is to show that, even if one conditioned on the zoonotic spillover
being true, it is significantly more likely that the spillover occurred outside of HSM than
inside HSM. If so, then the proximity of the HSM SSE to animal sources of virus in the
market is probably a coincidence, and provides very weak evidence in favor of zoonosis.
The argument is not cleanly presented; all of the numbers shown are being used as Bayes
factors, but most are written with percentages, and verbally described as probabilities in-
stead. The events as described are inconsistent: I will try to find the best interpretation of
the information given.
Formally, letAn be the event that the pandemic started in Wuhan from zoonotic spillover
and the first (detected) SSE is at the location of zoonotic spillover ,24 and letOt be the event
that the pandemic started in Wuhan from zoonotic spillover and the first (detected) SSE is
not at the location of zoonotic spillover. 25
We wish to compareP (An) to P (Ot). To do this, they make a series of observations Oi and
compute P (Oi|An) and P (Oi|Ot); these ratios are the Bayes factors. Their numbers, with
abbreviated descriptions of the observations, are
24We are very specifically not conditioning on that place being HSM.
25or we could remove the condition on zoonosis for Ot, it does not play much role in this part of the
calculation, and let Ot be any alternative to An
evidence P (Oi|An) P (Oi|Ot) Bayes (consv)
first SSE at HSM 0.15 to 0.30 1 6 .67 3 .33
no animal vendors infected 0.15 to 0.25 1 6 .67 4
test results unrelated to
wildlife
0.4 to 0.6 1 2 .5 1 .67
B dominant at HSM 0.2 to 0.3 1 5 3 .33
WHO cases centered at
HSM, other signals not
0.5 to 1 1 2 1
early cases associated with
HSM, but not strongly
0.3 to 0.5 1 3 .33 2
mahjong 0.3 to 0.4 1 3 .33 2 .5
infected person goes to
HSM
1 0 .001 to 0.0005 0 .001 0 .0005
HSM ideal superspreader lo-
cation
- - 10 4
more likely to detect SSE at
markets
- - 4 2
total - - 493 .8 1 .48
Each probability was given as a range, indicating a value they think is reasonable and a
more conservative estimate (ie, more favorable toAn). The column "Bayes" gives the Bayes
factors based on the former numbers; the "(consv)" column gives the more conservative
Bayes factors.
Let us walk through each of their observations - most will be discussed in greater detail
later.
• "first SSE at HSM": They estimate that 15% of contact with potential animal-sources
of pandemics is at HSM. As for the converse probability conditioned on Ot, they are
not truly claiming it is 1, but rather separated out evidence awkwardly into separate
factors, which are considered below.
During the presentation, they framed this discussion to consider the probability that
the SSE at HSM is the firstobserved SSE, not necessarily the first and only that existed
at that time, so in part of this calculation they are taking into account observational
bias; however, later Saar would concede the claim by Peter that the HSM SSE is the
first one. If we accept this concession then several adjustments must be made.
• "no animal vendors infected": None of the known infections at HSM are among animal
vendors. To my knowledge, no testing of animal vendors was conducted; we only have
confirmed illnesses among people who were hospitalized. If sars-cov-2 spilled over only
a single time (or perhaps twice; see section 5.1), it is very likely no infections among
animal vendors would be detected anyhow. I have no information about how the testing
of people at HSM compares with the testing processes during SARS1.
• "test results unrelated to wildlife": This is an important area of discussion that will
be considered later.
• "B dominant at HSM": Most sequenced illnesses linked to HSM were lineage B, so
under An it remains to be explained where lineage A came from.
• "WHO cases centered at HSM, other signals not": That is to say, the claim is that
the actual distribution of early cases is not centered on HSM, and that the appearance
that they are centered on HSM is due to observational bias. This should be ignored
following the presumption that HSM is the first SSE.
• "early cases associated with HSM, but not strongly": This is asking how to explain
the existence of early cases not associated with HSM (I think the slide has a typo?). I
think most likely such cases do not exist.
• "mahjong": It is a little unclear here what is in need of explanation when conditioned
on An.
• "infected person goes to HSM": If the pandemic started far from HSM, then someone
infected must travel to HSM for an SSE to occur there.
• "HSM ideal superspreader location": While an infected person might go to many
different possible locations, not all will become SSEs; they estimate that HSM is 10
times more likely to become an SSE than the average location. This will prove an
important point of discussion going forwards.
• "more likely to detect SSE at markets": Again, this should be ignored following the
presumption that HSM is the first SSE.
The goal of Rootclaim is to get a Bayes factor comfortably greater than 1: if so, then even
conditioning on zoonotic spillover, the hypothesisOt better explains the observations of early
case distribution than the hypothesis An. From then on, Rootclaim can argue against Ot
rather than An; or equivalently, if the evidence shown here collectively has a Bayes factor
greater than 1, then throwing this evidence out only favors zoonotic in future analysis.
I do not think Rootclaim succeeded at that subgoal: just removing the two factors that were
conceded, the "conservative" Bayes factor already passes below 1. If you also remove the
two factors I found most dubious ("early cases associated with HSM" and "mahjong"), even
their central estimate for the Bayes factor falls to 5.555, not comfortably above 1.
Indeed I think most of the probabilities in this table are toohigh, and not by the same amount
when conditioning on An versus Ot; I feel that in this analysis Rootclaim is consistently
overestimating the probability of rare events.26 I could be persuaded with difficulty that the
26In questioning ([2] at 1:15:00), it was clarified that this is to some extent deliberate: it is not the
probability of this particular observation, but rather any observation akin to this. It also was implied that
these should be regarded as Bayes factors rather than the probabilities, which explains why both sides are
too high, as for a Bayes factor only the ratio matters. However this was not presented clearly, and I am left
probability under An that no known animal vendors became sick was below the 15% that
Rootclaim presented; but certainly that probability under Ot is well below 100%. Overall, I
think most of the Bayes factors given by Rootclaim are more favorable toOt than is justified
by the observations.
Furthermore I do not see how to make the numbers Rootclaim gives here consistent with
their estimate that 10% of coronavirus pandemics that start in Wuhan would have their first
SSE in HSM (conditioned on the location of the SSE being unrelated to the location of the
primary case) [7]; this scenario corresponds to the Ot hypothesis, which here appears to be
at most 0.1%· 10 = 1%, a factor of 10 lower.
However, even if all the numbers shown here are completely correct, I am not persuaded
by the conclusion. The listed observations do not represent a canonical series of necessary
events that must occur under the hypothesis An to get an SSE at HSM. If they did, one
could argue that the choice of observations was natural or unmotivated. Rather, the listed
observations appear to be a miscellany of loosely related things that happened in the context
of the HSM outbreak and seemed vaguely odd. I expect that in any rare event there will be a
variety of strange things that happen, simply because when many things happen inevitably
some of them will be strange by chance.
This calculation feels like motivated reasoning: the answer was decided, and evidence was
sought until it aligned with that conclusion. Of course I do not think Rootclaim deliberately
did such a backwards method - I believe their process was completely honest and designed
to be fair to both hypotheses - but (as they are well aware) human biases are hard to stamp
out, and Bayesian calculations are not immune to being influenced by human biases. That
half of the evidence found was mooted or (in my estimation) unsupportive reflects poorly on
the argument; really, from the example above of the space lizard, one should expect hardly
any bias needed to get far more decisive a result without using flawed evidence at all.
In any case, the result is an argument that failed to convince me; I do not find most of the
numbers credible, and I do not find the process to combine them into a single Bayes factor
credible.

(no claims extracted for this section)
