5.4.4  Summary of significance of proposal

The proposal does not explicitly state it would add furin cleavage sites to viruses, ⟦1⟧ but it
does discuss adding cleavage sites in general shortly after referring to furin cleavage sites by
name.
⟦2*⟧ Most, but not all, of the genetic modification involved using backbones from known, pre-
existing viruses.
The proposal does not, as far as I understand, discuss any in vivo genetic modification; ⟦3⟧ all
editing was to be done by directly altering sequences, not by passaging through humanized
mice or other organisms. ⟦4⟧ Viruses would be used in vivo only for testing pathogenecity.
⟦5⟧ The proposal does specifically say it would screen for wild viruses with high affinity towards
human ACE2.
Overall, the Project DEFUSE proposal is a bit eerie in how it calls out multiple features that
are quite distinct in sars-cov-2. ⟦6⟧ However these features were previously known or suspected
to be important to human coronaviruses, and the proposal is hardly a blueprint for building
sars-cov-2, containing many irrelevancies and missing key components.
⟦7⟧ Project DEFUSE is most relevant in that it shows that the community of virologists was
broadly interested in making chimeric viruses with certain features which have the potential
for lab leak risk if handled improperly, and not that WIV in specific planned to do a particular
research path that would lead to creating sars-cov-2.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ [EVIDENCE] The proposal discusses adding cleavage sites in general, including furin cleavage sites by name.
⟦2*⟧ [EVIDENCE] Most genetic modification involved using backbones from known, pre-existing viruses.
⟦3⟧ [EVIDENCE] All editing was to be done by directly altering sequences, not by passaging through humanized mice or other organisms.
⟦4⟧ [EVIDENCE] Viruses would be used in vivo only for testing pathogenecity.
⟦5⟧ [EVIDENCE] The proposal would screen for wild viruses with high affinity towards human ACE2.
⟦6⟧ [EVIDENCE] Features distinct in SARS-CoV-2 were previously known or suspected to be important to human coronaviruses.
⟦7⟧ [EVIDENCE] The community of virologists was broadly interested in making chimeric viruses with certain features that have the potential for lab leak risk if handled improperly.

* = fuzzy-matched location (quote not verbatim in the raw text above); position is approximate, snapped to the nearest word boundary
