1.1.1  Huanan Seafood Market

So; what is the significance of HSM? ⟦1⟧ HSM is a large urban market with at least 1200
employees9 working in 680 shops, located on the first story of a multistory building; while
each avenue of stalls is roofed, the ends are not, and a major road divides the market into
west and east halves. ⟦2⟧ The market sold a variety of goods, some of which included wild or
exotic live animals. At least some of the trade in animals was likely illegal. ⟦3⟧ While sars-cov-2
originated in bats, it is not known that any bats were sold in the market; any intermediate
species between bats and humans are unknown. ⟦4⟧ The market did have live animals that
were susceptible to sars-like coronaviruses and were imported from south China, where the
progenitor of sars-cov-2 is almost certainly found [12].
Thus when multiple people who were employed at HSM became sick with a virus resembling
sars-cov-1, it was natural to suspect the possibility of an animal host at the market being
responsible; ⟦5⟧ indeed in early January, before there existed adequate capacity for testing for
covid, having an epidemiological link to the market was one component of a diagnosis of
covid.
⟦6⟧ In the time from 2019 December 10, when the earliest known covid case, Wei Guixian,
became ill, and the market closure on January 1, approximately 200 people are known 10 to
7ie, "South China"
8Being off-topic, I elsewhere refrain from giving my extremely vehement opinions about the extraordinary
incompetence collectively demonstrated by industrialized western countries in the face of the initial covid
outbreak, made all the more embarrassing by the fact that the WHO gave advance warning with explicit
action items, and China was successful even without those. I think the US should take a hard look at how
other countries handle certain issues and have the ambition to at least try to be a world leader; compare
how the US has 80 km of high-speed rail (the Acela corridor) and plans to build another 192 km by 2033 (in
California), whereas China has built 42000 km since 2008. While disease control is easier in an autocracy,
I hasten to point out that New Zealand and Taiwan both successfully eliminated covid until omicron. Had
the US the same death rate as New Zealand, Taiwan, Australia, Japan, or South Korea, about 1m of the
estimated 1.2m US covid deaths would have been averted. There needs to be an accounting for the US's
actions that asks why we let 1 million people die.
9There are 1162 vendors according to [32] annex page 182, and presumably a variety of other full time
employees as well.
10You'd think that although we don't know how many people had covid in 2019 December, surely we'd
know how many we know of. Alas not. This is the elusive "unknown known" of the Rumsfeld quadrafecta.
Figure 1: Two photographs from the west half of HSM, showing the varying air circulation
conditions within the market. The first image looks south along the main corridor from
alley 13, the second is located within alley 9. These images were taken from http://
babarlelephant.free-hoster.net/visiting-the-wuhan-seafood-market/ ; click on the
yellow dot above the 13 and two to the left of the 9.
have had onset of covid, ⟦7⟧ of which 62 or 63 were vendors at the market and others had known
epidemiological connections to it.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ Huanan Seafood Market is a large urban market with at least 1200 employees working in 680 shops, located on the first story of a multistory building.
⟦2⟧ The market sold a variety of goods, including wild or exotic live animals, some of which were likely traded illegally.
⟦3⟧ Sars-cov-2 originated in bats, but it is not known that any bats were sold in the market.
⟦4⟧ The market had live animals that were susceptible to sars-like coronaviruses and were imported from south China, where the progenitor of sars-cov-2 is almost certainly found.
⟦5⟧ Having an epidemiological link to the market was one component of a diagnosis of covid in early January, before there existed adequate capacity for testing for covid.
⟦6⟧ Approximately 200 people are known to have had onset of covid between December 10, 2019, and the market closure on January 1.
⟦7⟧ Of the approximately 200 people known to have had onset of covid, 62 or 63 were vendors at the market and others had known epidemiological connections to it.
