1.2  Background: what is in the sars-cov-2 genome?

⟦1⟧ Coronaviruses are large viruses whose genome consists of a single-strand of RNA with approx-
imately 30000 nucleotides. ⟦2⟧ The RNA is entangled with many copies of the viral nucleocapsid
protein, and when outside of cells is protected by an envelope consisting of a membrane taken
from the host cell and studded with viral proteins.
⟦3⟧ Viral RNA is translated 11 by ribosomes in the host cell to form proteins. ⟦4⟧ This is done in
groups of 3 nucleotides at a time, called "codons". ⟦5⟧ As there are 4 possible nucleotides at
each position, there are 64 possible codons, each of which yields a particular amino acid;
⟦6⟧ the chain of amino acids constitutes a protein, with the particular chemical properties of
the amino acids causing it to fold into a shape suitable for that protein's specific function.
⟦7⟧ The assignment of an amino acid to each possible codon is called the genetic code. ⟦8⟧ Humans
have 20 different amino acids, ⟦9⟧ so there exist multiple codons that yield the same amino
acid, ⟦10⟧ and synonymous mutations which change the nucleotide sequence without changing
the amino acid sequence are possible. The genetic code is not random: mutations tend to be
synonymous, and nonsynonymous mutations tend to yield amino acids with similar chemical
⟦11⟧ 11The coronavirus genome is positive sense, meaning that first the genomic RNA is transcribed to make
negative sense RNA, which is then translated.
Figure 2: Photograph of the west half of HSM, looking west from Xinhua road, with the east
half of HSM behind the viewer. Notice that the end of each alley opens up directly to the
air, with two storefronts between each alley. The busy street would have slowed foot traffic
between west and east HSM. I believe this image was captured after HSM was closed down
but before the current barriers were installed. Photograph from Baidu street view.
properties, or at least more often than one would expect from a randomly designed genetic
code.
⟦12⟧ As host cells do not contain the cellular machinery to replicate RNA, the first two-thirds of
the viral genome, called the "open reading frame 1ab" (ORF1ab), encodes 16 different pro-
teins involved in the viral replication and assembly process. ⟦13⟧ The rest of the protein encodes
the four structural proteins: spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M), and nucleocapsid (N),
as well as accessory proteins. ⟦14⟧ The envelope and membrane proteins are components of the
viral envelope, ⟦15⟧ while the large spike protein protrudes outwards from the envelope, making
it the first point of contact with other objects. The bumpy texture of the spike proteins
resembles a "crown", giving coronaviruses their name.
⟦16⟧ The spike protein plays an important role in the infection process, as it binds to a matching
receptor in the membrane of the target cells. ⟦17⟧ In sars-cov-2, the spike binds to the ACE2
receptor found throughout the human body, including lungs and intestines; ⟦18⟧ after binding, the
spike is then cleaved into two pieces, which for reasons inscrutable to me facilitates merging
the virus envelope with the cellular membrane and so delivering the genome into the cell.
This cleaving process will become relevant after we have introduced the phylogenetics of
coronaviruses.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ The coronavirus genome consists of a single-strand of RNA with approximately 30000 nucleotides.
⟦2⟧ The RNA is entangled with many copies of the viral nucleocapsid protein.
⟦3⟧ The viral RNA is translated by ribosomes in the host cell to form proteins.
⟦4⟧ The translation of viral RNA is done in groups of 3 nucleotides at a time, called codons.
⟦5⟧ There are 64 possible codons, each of which yields a particular amino acid.
⟦6⟧ The chain of amino acids constitutes a protein, with the particular chemical properties of the amino acids causing it to fold into a shape suitable for that protein's specific function.
⟦7⟧ The assignment of an amino acid to each possible codon is called the genetic code.
⟦8⟧ Humans have 20 different amino acids.
⟦9⟧ There exist multiple codons that yield the same amino acid.
⟦10⟧ Synonymous mutations which change the nucleotide sequence without changing the amino acid sequence are possible.
⟦11⟧ The coronavirus genome is positive sense, meaning that first the genomic RNA is transcribed to make negative sense RNA, which is then translated.
⟦12⟧ The first two-thirds of the viral genome, called the open reading frame 1ab (ORF1ab), encodes 16 different proteins involved in the viral replication and assembly process.
⟦13⟧ The rest of the protein encodes the four structural proteins: spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M), and nucleocapsid (N), as well as accessory proteins.
⟦14⟧ The envelope and membrane proteins are components of the viral envelope.
⟦15⟧ The large spike protein protrudes outwards from the envelope, making it the first point of contact with other objects.
⟦16⟧ The spike protein plays an important role in the infection process, as it binds to a matching receptor in the membrane of the target cells.
⟦17⟧ In SARS-CoV-2, the spike binds to the ACE2 receptor found throughout the human body, including lungs and intestines.
⟦18⟧ After binding, the spike is then cleaved into two pieces, which facilitates merging the virus envelope with the cellular membrane and so delivering the genome into the cell.
