1.2.2  Furin cleavage site

While most of the disagreements between sars-cov-2 and banal-20-52 and other bat coron-
aviruses are point mutations, there is one important larger difference. Recall that when the
spike protein S binds to the ACE2 receptor on a human target cell, to facilitate fusion with
the cell the spike protein must be cut into two subregions, called S1 and S2. In sars-cov-2
infections in humans, this cutting process is performed by the furin enzyme.
⟦1⟧ Furin recognizes proteins with an amino acid sequence of the form RxxR or especially RRxR
(here, "x" stands for any amino acid and R stands for arginine), cutting them; thus any such
amino acid sequence is referred to as a furin cleavage site (FCS). ⟦2⟧ The proper functioning of
sars-cov-2 therefore necessitates that the boundary between S1 and S2 is an FCS. Indeed:
CAG ACT CAG ACT AAT TCT CCT CGG CGG GCA CGT AGT GTA GCT AGT
Figure 5: Unrooted phylogenetic "tree" of early sars-cov-2 samples collected in Wuhan. Each
circle represents a collection of samples with identical genome; the size of the circle is the
number of samples, and the color(s) of the circle is the date of illness onset for those people.
Bluer circles are earlier illnesses, and redder circles are later. The number of tick marks
on a line indicates the number of nucleotides difference between two genomes. The left
cluster are lineage B cases, and the right cluster are lineage A cases, with a few ambiguous
cases in between. The middle arrow identifies the first known case, a Mr Chen with onset
2019 December 8, although he may have become ill on December 12. (Technically this is a
haplotype network, not a phylogenetic tree, in that it shows only the genetic similarity of
different cases without any attempt to identify which are ancestral/related to each other.
It is possible for distantly related samples to have similar genomes by chance, as the same
mutations can arise more than once independently.) Figure from [32], page 79. See also page
69 for a larger tree.
Q T Q T N S P R R A R S V A S
Shown is an excerpt from the nucleotide sequence and corresponding amino acid sequence
for Wuhan-Hu-1, the reference genome for sars-cov-2, collected in 2019 December [25]. ⟦3⟧ The
RRAR subsequence constitutes an FCS.
⟦4⟧ While sars-cov-2 passes between humans primarily through respiratory droplets, ⟦5⟧ this is not
the case for bat coronaviruses, which are spread through droppings and therefore must
survive the gastrointestinal tract. ⟦6⟧ This creates a different life cycle for virus replication, and
consequentially an FCS may be evolutionarily harmful. We can compare sars-cov-2 to the
closest known wild virus banal-20-52 at this location ([3] at 35:30):
CAG ACT CAa ACT AAT TCA CGT AGT GTg GCa AGT
Q T Q T N S R S V A S
I have marked the three point mutations in this section with lower-case letters; each is syn-
onymous. (There are about 1000 point mutations in the 30000 nucleotides.) More notably,
however, is that banal-20-52 is 12 nucleotides shorter here, as it is missing the sequence T
CCT CGG CGG GC .14

Claims:
⟦1⟧ The furin enzyme recognizes proteins with an amino acid sequence of the form RxxR or especially RRxR and cuts them.
⟦2⟧ The presence of the furin cleavage site in SARS-CoV-2 is necessary for the proper functioning of the virus.
⟦3⟧ The RRAR subsequence in the SARS-CoV-2 genome constitutes a furin cleavage site.
⟦4⟧ SARS-CoV-2 is primarily spread between humans through respiratory droplets.
⟦5⟧ Bat coronaviruses are spread through droppings and must survive the gastrointestinal tract.
⟦6⟧ The presence of a furin cleavage site may be evolutionarily harmful in bat coronaviruses due to their different life cycle.
