1.3  Format of the debate

⟦1*⟧ Rootclaim was created to demonstrate the usefulness of a particular methodology for ana-
lyzing complicated questions, where there exists abundant lines of circumstantial evidence
both for and against any particular hypothesis. After systematically evaluating each piece
of evidence, they can be integrated into a gestalt that gives a final level of confidence we can
have in each hypothesis.
I refer to this technique as Bayesian reasoning or Bayesian computation , which will be
discussed in the next section; however Rootclaim are far from the only ones to use Bayesian
reasoning, and I believe they claim to distinguish themselves from others in the details of
how the evaluate the evidence. In any case ⟦2⟧ I agree with their critiques of other methodologies
(or, frequently, lack thereof) and that most people who get the right answer do so more by
chance than not.
⟦3⟧ This debate is the first organized by Rootclaim, of hopefully multiple (on different topics,
to be clear!), as a series of 3 spoken debate sessions totalling 20 hours [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] and
various written supplements [7, 8]. I am one of two judges, deciding independently, with the
outcome of the debate determined by the average of our decisions.
⟦4⟧ I assess the debate structure designed by Rootclaim to be very fair and not create any
advantage for them, and it was clear that Saar consciously acted in good faith throughout.
To me, the debate felt more like a collaboration of four people working together to seek the
truth than an adversarial contest; it is rare to see contentious issues worked out in such a
productive manner between people acting in good faith.
⟦5⟧ As I find that both parties argued in good faith and there were no significant violations of (the
spirit of) the debate rules, my evaluation is based solely on the arguments as presented at an
object level, or my best interpretation thereof. ⟦6⟧ Peter identified and criticized a diversity of
lab leak theories put forth by other parties, but these had no bearing on Rootclaim's theory.
Statements were evaluated independently of the credibility of other parties who assert them.
⟦7⟧ I did not attempt to "keep score" of which side made more factual errors or changed their
argument more often; each claim was given independent credulity. ⟦8⟧ Neither side was laden
with the burden of proof. While in other contexts it might be appropriate and fair to dismiss
arguments a priori for rhetorical reasons (eg, as a defense against techniques like sea lioning
or gish gollop), ⟦9⟧ here my sole concern is whose theory is best supported by the evidence.
⟦10*⟧ Per the rules of the debate, I am to evaluate the relative likelihood of the two hypotheses
advanced: Rootclaim's claim that the sars-cov-2 outbreak was due to gain-of-function labo-
ratory research, and Peter's challenge that it was the result of natural spillover from wildlife
without laboratory involvement. Only the information provided through the debate, debate
14Note that alternatively Rootclaim suggests that the insert is CCT CGG CGG GCA , and there was a fourth
point mutation from TCT to TCA immediately before it.
material, and references therein may be considered; no prior beliefs or private research of
my own can be used, as this would deny the participants opportunity to identify flaws and
rebut such arguments. ⟦11⟧ In so far as was reasonable within the constraints of time I attempted
to challenge each participant on any claims they made that appeared suspect, so that they
had opportunity to bolster their argument or substitute it with another. Unfortunately time
is limited and only so many rounds of argument and counterargument can be sustained;
eventually one must reach a decision.
I have laid out here in some detail how I reached the decision I did, though in view of the
considerable volume already written on this subject I do not imagine this will be sufficient
to compel anyone to change their mind. Doubtlessly the participants of the debate will have
rebuttals to what I write that disagrees with them, and perhaps I may wish to revise this in
the future, but at least for the purposes of the debate it is finished.

Claims:
⟦1*⟧ Rootclaim was created to demonstrate the usefulness of a particular methodology for analyzing complicated questions, where there exists abundant lines of circumstantial evidence both for and against any particular hypothesis.
⟦2⟧ The judge agrees with Rootclaim's critiques of other methodologies for analyzing complicated questions.
⟦3⟧ The debate is the first organized by Rootclaim, and it consists of 3 spoken debate sessions and various written supplements.
⟦4⟧ The judge assesses the debate structure designed by Rootclaim to be very fair and not create any advantage for them.
⟦5⟧ The judge finds that both parties argued in good faith and there were no significant violations of the debate rules.
⟦6⟧ Peter identified and criticized a diversity of lab leak theories put forth by other parties, but these had no bearing on Rootclaim's theory.
⟦7⟧ The judge did not attempt to keep score of which side made more factual errors or changed their argument more often.
⟦8⟧ Neither side was laden with the burden of proof in the debate.
⟦9⟧ The judge's sole concern is whose theory is best supported by the evidence.
⟦10*⟧ The judge is to evaluate the relative likelihood of the two hypotheses advanced: Rootclaim's claim that the sars-cov-2 outbreak was due to gain-of-function laboratory research, and Peter's challenge that it was the result of natural spillover from wildlife without laboratory involvement.
⟦11⟧ The judge attempted to challenge each participant on any claims they made that appeared suspect.

* = fuzzy-matched location (quote not verbatim in the raw text above); position is approximate, snapped to the nearest word boundary
