1.3.1  About this document

⟦1⟧ My foremost goal in this document is to give the best possible account for the origins of covid
as I understand them, and only incidentally explain how I reached my decision. Therefore,
to avoid leaving glaring holes in explanatory passages, I have occasionally looked up minor
details, eg to fill out the background section or section B; ⟦2⟧ in so far as possible I have restricted
myself to sources directly cited by the debate parties, ⟦3⟧ though I may have inadvertently used
a few indirect citations. Most of this information had no bearing on the decision; the one
piece of information I found that did was relegated to appendix C.
⟦4⟧ In section 7 I present an uncomfortably quantitative analysis of the two conflicting theories
and my affirmative conclusion for which is more likely based on the information from the
debate. However it felt unsatisfying to say why I believed the arguments for one theory
without also saying why I failed to be persuaded by the arguments against it. The majority
of this document, particularly sections 3.1, 3.2, 4.5, and A, ⟦5⟧ contains detailed criticisms of
arguments presented by Rootclaim, identifying where I believe those arguments to be flawed.
These refutational passages are not part of my affirmative conclusion, so I have taken greater
liberty in the use of complicated models or analysis. ⟦6⟧ For the affirmative analysis I have
eschewed such complexities: ⟦7⟧ best to keep it simple and pay a small price in accuracy rather
than risk large model error.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ The author's foremost goal in this document is to give the best possible account for the origins of COVID-19 as they understand them.
⟦2⟧ The author has restricted themselves to sources directly cited by the debate parties as much as possible.
⟦3⟧ The author may have inadvertently used a few indirect citations.
⟦4⟧ The author presents a quantitative analysis of the two conflicting theories in section 7.
⟦5⟧ The author believes the arguments presented by Rootclaim are flawed in certain areas.
⟦6⟧ The author has taken greater liberty in the use of complicated models or analysis in refutational passages.
⟦7⟧ The author's affirmative conclusion is presented in a simple manner, prioritizing simplicity over accuracy.
