1  Introduction

When the "novel coronavirus" started dominating headlines in mid-January 2020, I was
checking the news every day: counting cases, tracking international transmissions, wondering
when it would reach my city, and preparing for quarantine. 1
⟦1⟧ I know now in retrospect that instead of planning for the coming pandemic I should have
spent that time reading about covid origins theories, and kept at it for these past four years
uninterrupted, as only then might I have been adequately prepared for the deluge of detailed
claims and arguments presented during the debate. Before participating in this debate I had
no realization of the vast depth of evidence and analysis encompassed in the gamut of "was
covid a lab leak?".
⟦2⟧ It is not possible to answer that question without addressing the depth of evidence head-on,
and the length of this document reflects that duty. Even still many of the claims brought
up during the debate pass unchallenged here.
However the reader should not be intimidated by its length; the argument is quite simple at
its heart, and I have striven to make my discussion approachable. 2
⟦3*⟧ In this section, we will introduce the necessarily context to understand the differing argu-
ments about the origin of covid: this covers both the spread of the earliest known covid
cases, and the details of how the sars-cov-2 virus works and how it relates to other viruses.
⟦4⟧ In section 2 I will explain and demonstrate how Bayesian updating can be used to estimate
the probability of a hypothesis conditioned on observations.
⟦5⟧ In section 3 I demonstrate how Bayesian inference can be done incorrectly, and I assess
Rootclaim's two Bayesian calculations.
⟦6*⟧ Section 4 concerns the most critical question of the debate: how significant was the covid out-
break in the Huanan Seafood Market? This includes an extended discussion of Rootclaim's
reasoning for expecting a covid outbreak there under the lab leak hypothesis.
⟦7⟧ Section 5 covers a miscellanea of topics related to the genetics of sars-cov-2, including the
Project DEFUSE proposal that is the centerpiece of the lab leak hypothesis.
In section 6 we have a brief interlude to ask why there has been no whistleblower for the
origin of covid.
⟦8⟧ Finally in section 7, having assessed others' arguments at lengths, I present my own best
interpretation of the zoonotic and lab leak hypotheses and their relative likelihood.
Readers may also find the glossary of technical terms in the appendix useful.
⟦9*⟧ In the following, I will be writing at length about my disagreements with the argument
presented by Rootclaim, which may create the illusion that I think they were wrong about
1which never happened, presumably warded off by my pasta stockpile like rain from an umbrella
2I am assuming most readers will be skipping over the equations or more math-y parts, which are mostly
non-essential to the text; if you plan on verifying my calculations you will have some work ahead of you, as
I usually only gave the minimum information needed to infer how each calculation was performed.
everything (or conversely that I agree with Peter's claims, by absence of discussion of them).
This is not true; rather, this document is plenty long even without any discussion of points
of agreement. Much of my analysis and reasoning is condensed or omitted.
⟦10⟧ I have grounded my analysis in the facts and evidence, but it was performed under acute
time pressure on a subject which I am not an expert in, did not have a strong pre-existing
opinion, and (per the rules of the debate) I could not independently research. Much of the
analysis involves conflicting tertiary sources, so that I must critically assess claims made by
people with greater expertise or experience than I, and with access to primary or secondary
sources that I lack. I have done my best; may the reader be understanding of any errors in
fact or judgement that follow.
⟦11⟧ While I do ultimately compute a numerical confidence level in the competing hypotheses,
the resulting number should not be taken in earnest. To get to this quantitative conclusion
required assigning numbers to many speculative or unknowable processes for which there are
a wide range of believable values. I expect the reader to favor different numbers or choices
than I made.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ The author was not adequately prepared for the debate about COVID-19 origins because they did not spend enough time reading about COVID-19 origins theories before participating in the debate.
⟦2⟧ The author believes that addressing the depth of evidence about COVID-19 origins is necessary to answer the question of whether COVID-19 was a lab leak.
⟦3*⟧ The author will introduce the necessary context to understand the differing arguments about the origin of COVID-19 in this section.
⟦4⟧ The author will explain and demonstrate how Bayesian updating can be used to estimate the probability of a hypothesis conditioned on observations in section 2.
⟦5⟧ The author will demonstrate how Bayesian inference can be done incorrectly and assess Rootclaim's two Bayesian calculations in section 3.
⟦6*⟧ Section 4 concerns the most critical question of the debate: how significant was the COVID-19 outbreak in the Huanan Seafood Market.
⟦7⟧ Section 5 covers a miscellanea of topics related to the genetics of SARS-CoV-2, including the Project DEFUSE proposal that is the centerpiece of the lab leak hypothesis.
⟦8⟧ The author will present their own best interpretation of the zoonotic and lab leak hypotheses and their relative likelihood in section 7.
⟦9*⟧ The author may have created the illusion that they think Rootclaim was wrong about everything due to the extensive discussion of their disagreements.
⟦10⟧ The author's analysis was performed under acute time pressure and without independent research due to the rules of the debate.
⟦11⟧ The author does not expect the reader to take the computed numerical confidence level in the competing hypotheses in earnest.

* = fuzzy-matched location (quote not verbatim in the raw text above); position is approximate, snapped to the nearest word boundary
