2.1  Hypothesis testing and p-values

Bayes factors have a simple and direct relationship with p-values; understanding this re-
lationship may be beneficial, as the reader may already be familiar with the latter due to
their wide use in hypothesis testing, or conversely the reader may find Bayes factors more
intuitive and use it to gain comprehension for p-values. 19
In hypothesis testing, one considers a null hypothesis A (or, more commonly, H0, but we
will mimic the notation from above) and the alternate hypothesis B =¬A (usually denoted
Ha). We ask, what is the probability of an observation (or collection of observations) O,
conditional on A? Except, now O is not a binary event, which happens or not, but some
kind of numeric data.
19Someday I will more clearly explain the relationship between Bayesian computation and hypothesis
testing than I did here, so the reader may want to skip this section for now.
Suppose, ifA is true, thatO is a real number drawn from some known probability distribution
(ie this is called a random variable ). We will then, for every possible value x of O, assign
a corresponding value p which lies in the range [0 , 1], called the p-value. ⟦1⟧ How to do this is
the main source of confusion in hypothesis testing, as the process is subjective. ⟦2⟧ A common
choice is the map:
x↦→P (O≤x)
In words, this says for one possible value of x we assign it the p-value that is the probability
O would have been smaller than or equal to x. Say, for example, O is the number of heads
in 100 coin flips, and our null hypothesis is that the coin is fair. If we observe x = 40 coin
flips, then the probability of observing 40 or fewer heads would have been 0.02844, which
would be the p-value for the above choice of map.
So how do we choose the map? What we do is rank the possible values of O by how
anomalous they are under the null hypothesis A; or equivalently, by how well they support
the alternative hypothesis B over A. For the 100 coin flips, the further the result is from
50, the more anomalous; this is an example of a two-tailed test, because the two ends of the
hypothesis are the most notable and have a small p-value, while the middle of the distribution
is expected and has a large p-value. The mapping given above is a one-tailed test; one end
of the range of values of O (here, the low end) is interpreted as being the most anomalous,
and the other end is interpreted as being the most expected.
For our coin flip test, a two-tailed20 test would have been more appropriate; 60 or more heads
would have been just as anomalous as 40 or fewer heads, so that x = 40 would have had a
p-value of P (O≤ 40 or O≥ 60) = 0.05689. A one-tailed test would have been appropriate
if we had, prior to collecting observations, expected or been interested in a coin that was
biased for one side in particular. If we were trying to find coins that were biased in favor of
heads, say, we would use the p-valueP (O≥x) and the observation x = 40 heads would not
have been anomalous at all (p = 0.97156) in favor of the alternative hypothesis over the null
hypothesis.
⟦3⟧ In summary, the two things we need the mapping to satisfy are as follows:
• Assuming the null hypothesis, the result p should be a random variable uniformly
distributed in the range [0, 1].
• Assuming the alternate hypothesis, we want p to be as small as possible.
If we observe p = 0.001 then this is very surprising under the null hypothesis - a 1 in 1000
coincidence! The second property of the mapping gives us the best chance of observing these
surprisingly small values of p if, in fact, the null hypothesis isn't true: this increases the
"statistical power" of the test.
Our reasoning process therefore looks as follows. ⟦4⟧ If the null hypothesis is true, then a very
small value ofp is unlikely, so if we observe a small value ofp we "reject" the null hypothesis.
⟦5⟧ If we do not observe a small value ofp, we fail to reject the null hypothesis, and do not reach
any particular conclusion.
20pun not intended
There are two key differences between hypothesis testing and Bayesian reasoning: ⟦6⟧ with
hypothesis testing, we do not assume any prior probabilities for the two hypotheses - they
are not treated as random events at all, but as simply unknown prepositions; ⟦7⟧ and we do not
calculate a distribution for the observable O conditioned on the alternative hypothesis B. If
we have access to those two additional pieces of data, then we should perform a Bayesian
calculation, and we would get a stronger conclusion of the form of the probability of A orB
givenO, instead of a weaker conclusion of "reject" or "fail to reject" A with some confidence
levelp.
⟦8*⟧ Hypothesis testing is used when these extra pieces of data are unavailable or highly specu-
lative. For our coin flips, we don't have any prior expectation of the probability of a coin
being biased, and we can't calculate the probability of observing a certain number of heads
conditioned on the coin being unfair (since the alternative hypothesis is for any bias, not a
particular amount of bias). ⟦9⟧ The p-value obtained from hypothesis testing cannot be turned
into a probability for a hypothesis without adding this information.
Frequently, when working with complicated systems, it makes sense to focus on a single
observation and yield just a p-value P (Oi|A) or Bayes factor P (Oi|A)/P (Oi|¬A) for that
observation, and leave the calculation ofP (A|O1∩···∩ On) to secondary analysis. Otherwise,
when combining observations from multiple primary analyses it would be necessary to undo
all their calculations to sort out conflicting priors and other choices. For this reason primary
research usually stops at computing a p-value.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ The choice of mapping used to assign p-values can be subjective and depends on the specific problem being studied.
⟦2⟧ The p-value for a given observation is the probability of observing a result at least as extreme as the one observed, assuming the null hypothesis is true.
⟦3⟧ The mapping used to assign p-values should satisfy two properties: the result p should be a random variable uniformly distributed in the range [0, 1] under the null hypothesis, and p should be as small as possible under the alternate hypothesis.
⟦4⟧ If the null hypothesis is true, then a very small value of p is unlikely, so if we observe a small value of p we reject the null hypothesis.
⟦5⟧ If we do not observe a small value of p, we fail to reject the null hypothesis, and do not reach any particular conclusion.
⟦6⟧ Hypothesis testing does not assume prior probabilities for the two hypotheses.
⟦7⟧ Hypothesis testing does not calculate a distribution for the observable O conditioned on the alternative hypothesis B.
⟦8*⟧ Hypothesis testing is used when prior probabilities for the two hypotheses or the distribution for the observable O conditioned on the alternative hypothesis B are unavailable or highly speculative.
⟦9⟧ The presence of a p-value does not imply the probability of a hypothesis without additional information.

* = fuzzy-matched location (quote not verbatim in the raw text above); position is approximate, snapped to the nearest word boundary
