2  Introduction to Bayesian computation

Suppose you have two exclusive events 15 A and B =¬A you wish to distinguish. Unfortu-
nately we cannot observe them directly; instead we make some sequence of other observations
O1,O 2,...,O n.
If one of our observations O1 were, say, incompatible with A, then we would be done; by
simple deductive reasoning we could say " A implies¬O1; O1; therefore¬A". Instead each
15⟦1⟧ In probability theory, an event is a statement which has a probability of being true. We assume events
follow certain rules, such as if X and Y are events then there is an event called X∩Y , representing that
both X and Y are true, satisfying P (X∩Y )≤P (X).
Figure 6: XKCD 2545
of our observations are consistent with either A or B - but, critically, not equally so. We
measure the degree of consistency with the conditional probabilities16P (Oi|A) andP (Oi|B).
From this information it is a simple application of Bayes' Theorem to compute P (A|O1),
and repeated application to get P (A|O1∩O2∩···∩ On).
There is nothing deeper to performing Bayesian computation than repeated use of Bayes'
Theorem, but with a little organization we can gain better understanding of the process and
be less likely to make mistakes. First, we can build a table of the information we know:
prior P (A) P (B)
observation 1 P (O1|A) P (O1|B)
observation 2 P (O2|A∩O1) P (O2|B∩O1)
observation 3 P (O3|A∩O1∩O2) P (O3|B∩O1∩O2)
Because we will be interested in the event that all of the observations are jointly true O1∩
O2∩O3, rather than only one or another of them being true, we have to use the probability
of each observation conditioned on the previous ones also happening. If our observations are
independent of each other then this is unnecessary, as P (O3|A∩O1∩O2) =P (O3|A) in this
case.
Next, let us use the definition of conditional probability:
⟦2*⟧ 16The symbol P (X|Y ), read "(the conditional) probability of X given Y " is defined as the ratio P (X∩
Y )/P (Y ).
P (A) =P (A)
P (A∩O1) =P (A)·P (O1|A)
P (A∩O1∩O2) =P (A∩O1)·P (O2|A∩O1)
=P (A)·P (O1|A)·P (O2|A∩O1)
P (A∩O1∩O2∩O3) =P (A∩O1∩O2)·P (O3|A∩O1∩O2)
=P (A)·P (O1|A)·P (O2|A∩O1)·P (O3|A∩O1∩O2)
Thus, the cumulative products we get by just multiplying down the columns of the previous
table are the joint probabilities:
- 1 1
prior P (A) P (B)
observation 1 P (A∩O1) P (B∩O1)
observation 2 P (A∩O1∩O2) P (B∩O1∩O2)
observation 3 P (A∩O1∩O2∩O3) P (B∩O1∩O2∩O3)
(⟦3⟧ Note that mathematically there is nothing distinguishing the prior probability from any
of our observations; the choice of what information to call "prior" versus "observation" is
just a matter of convention. You can think of prior as the "null" or trivial observation:
how much you should update your probabilities based on not making any observations at
all. ⟦4⟧ In the calculations by Rootclaim, they treat the prior slightly differently from the other
observations, resulting in needing to re-normalize the probabilities at the end; of course this
does not change the conclusions, only the order things are calculated in.)
We should interpret each row as telling us the relative probability of either of the hypotheti-
calsA,B jointly with the cumulative observations. Initially, before making any observations,
the prior probabilities P (A) and P (B) sum to 1 (because B =¬A) but as we apply succes-
sive observations the sum of each row will decrease and become smaller than 1. ⟦5⟧ This residue
probability (ie, the amount by which each row sums to less than 1) represents the chance of
some hypothetical alternative in which at least one of the observations didn't happen.
Ok, what good has this done us? Well, our goal is to find the conditional probability
P (A|O1∩···∩⟦6*⟧  On). This is just equal to the fraction of the nth row that is in the first
column:
P (A|O) = P (A∩O)
P (O) = P (A∩O)
P (A∩O) +P (B∩O).
Indeed, all that matters is the ratio of the two columns:
P (A|O) = 1
1 +P (B∩O)/P (A∩O)
⟦7⟧ Since the columns of the second table were found by just multiplying the columns of the
first table, the ratio of the columns of the second table are just the product of the ratio of
the columns of the first table:
P (A∩O1∩O2∩O3)
P (B∩O1∩O2∩O3) = P (A)
P (B)· P (O1|A)
P (O2|B)· P (O2|A∩O1)
P (O2|B∩O1)· P (O3|A∩O1∩O2)
P (O3|B∩O1∩O2)
Thus we began with eight 17 pieces of data in the first table but it turns out that all we
needed was four pieces of data, supposing we can directly measure these ratios.
⟦8⟧ Indeed frequently the ratio P (O1|A)/P (O1|B), called the Bayes factor, is easier to measure
than either P (O1|A) or P (O1|B) separately; in messy, real-world scenarios the probability
of the event O1 might be wrapped up with many uncertain factors that have nothing to
do with either A or B. Estimating P (O1|A) requires assessing these irrelevant factors, but
estimating the Bayes factor does not.
⟦9⟧ In extremes where probabilities get very close to 0 or 1 we can simplify matters further by
taking logarithms everywhere - why multiply when instead you can add? We then have
logarithmic Bayes factors
I1 = logP (O1|A)
P (O1|B)
⟦10*⟧ whereI1 is the information contained in the first observation, with positive numbers inform-
ing us in favor of event A, and negative numbers informing us against it. If the logarithm is
base 2, then I1 has units of bits. Adding up each of our pieces of information gives
logP (A∩O1∩···∩ On)
P (B∩O1∩···∩ On) =I1 +··· +In
(⟦11⟧ Given a new piece of information In+1, we can simply add it to the sum we have so far; this
is called Bayesian updating.)
This result is also called the (conditional) log-odds of A.18 Log-odds can in some situations
be more intuitive than ordinary probability, especially for extreme probabilities. ⟦12⟧ A log-odds
of 0 means a probability of 50%, and positive log-odds means an event that is more likely
to happen than ⟦13*⟧ not. From the (conditional) log-odds of A we can compute the ordinary
(conditional) probability:
P (A|O1∩···∩ On) = 1
1 + exp(-(I1 +··· +In)).
How does this work in practice? Suppose some event of interest A has some probability
of being true; start by computing the unconditional (ie, prior) log-odds of A. We make a
series of observations, and assess for each observation how much information it provides in
17Actually seven, because we knew P (A) +P (B) = 1, so the first row only had one data point.
18The log-odds of A is defined as log( P (A)/P (¬A)), but here we have conditioned on the observations
O1∩···∩ On.
favor of A versus against it. We update our log-odds of A by adding to it the information
(positive or negative) from each observation. The result is the updated (ie, conditional on
the observations) log-odds for A. Alternatively, if we don't want to work with logarithms,
instead of adding up log-odds we can directly multiply probabilities.
Let us work an example. Suppose you are hiring an engineer, and you want to know their
competency A at a particular skill. You make three independent observations: they did ad-
equately on an interview assessing that skill, they have an obscure certificate for that skill,
and they went to University of Example which has a good engineering program. Most can-
didates, whether competent or not, do not have that certificate nor went to that university,
so it is hard to assess the probability of those observations; but the relative probabilities, or
Bayes factors, are easier to guess at. We have
- P (Oi|A) P (Oi|¬A) Bayes log-odds
prior 0 .1 0 .9 0 .111 -2.2
interview 0 .4 0 .1 4 1 .39
certificate - - 1 .2 0 .18
UoE grad - - 2 0 .69
total - - 1 .0667 0 .065
Adding up the last column we get a log-odds of 0.065, or a probability of 51.6%, just barely
above even odds that the candidate has this particular skill.
⟦14⟧ This example also illustrates a second important principle to understand with Bayesian
reasoning: it can applied to any situation, and always gives an answer, regardless of how
appropriate the technique is for the application. I certainly hope no one involved in hiring
candidates is using a calculation of this nature to help make that decision, or at least not with
the same lack of care as I did above. One must pay close attention to potential problems: did
you account for all the available evidence? how accurate are your probabilities? how robust
is your result to changes in the data? The messier and more "real-world" your situation, the
easier it is to run afoul.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ In probability theory, an event is a statement which has a probability of being true.
⟦2*⟧ The symbol P(X|Y) is defined as the ratio P(X∩Y)/P(Y).
⟦3⟧ The choice of what information to call "prior" versus "observation" is just a matter of convention.
⟦4⟧ Rootclaim treats the prior slightly differently from the other observations, resulting in needing to re-normalize the probabilities at the end.
⟦5⟧ The residue probability represents the chance of some hypothetical alternative in which at least one of the observations didn't happen.
⟦6*⟧ The conditional probability P(A|O1∩···∩On) is equal to the fraction of the nth row that is in the first column.
⟦7⟧ The ratio of the columns of the second table are just the product of the ratio of the columns of the first table.
⟦8⟧ The Bayes factor is easier to measure than either P(O1|A) or P(O1|B) separately in messy, real-world scenarios.
⟦9⟧ Taking logarithms everywhere can simplify matters further when probabilities get very close to 0 or 1.
⟦10*⟧ The logarithmic Bayes factors have units of bits if the logarithm is base 2.
⟦11⟧ Bayesian updating involves adding new pieces of information to the sum of the previous information.
⟦12⟧ A log-odds of 0 means a probability of 50%, and positive log-odds means an event that is more likely to happen than not.
⟦13*⟧ The conditional probability P(A|O1∩···∩On) can be computed from the conditional log-odds of A.
⟦14⟧ Bayesian reasoning can be applied to any situation and always gives an answer, regardless of how appropriate the technique is for the application.

* = fuzzy-matched location (quote not verbatim in the raw text above); position is approximate, snapped to the nearest word boundary
