3.3  Is Bayesian reasoning suited for this problem?

Outside of simple toy problems that do not reflect the complexities of the real world, ⟦1⟧ Bayesian
reasoning is best suited for dealing with a small number of strong but conflicting pieces of
evidence. (Of course, if they were not conflicting, one wouldn't need to do any calculations
at all.) Each additional multiplicand introduces a great deal of error in the final result,
both from the uncertainty of its value, but also from the potential sources of bias. ⟦2⟧ Including
another factor of 2 has the potential to do more harm than good if you cannot be highly
confident of controlling the error.
Ideally, one would assemble a list of evidence that is either canonical in some way, pre-
registered (ie you decide which evidence to include before you know which hypothesis it
favors), and/or extremely persuasive (has a large Bayes factor that is unlikely to arise from
chance). ⟦3⟧ Most likely, any naively-computed Bayes factors would have to be renormalized
towards 1 to account for the steel-manning of both hypotheses; ⟦4⟧ as Saar correctly observed,
if you have any Bayes factors of 1000 and you are not doing a physics experiment then your
calculation is probably flawed. 27
⟦5⟧ Rootclaim's mission is to improve upon brittle intuitive reasoning with the use of careful
Bayesian calculations; certainly a worthy goal and worthwhile method. However I take issue
with their labeling more traditional methods - what I would call deductive reasoning - as
"human inference", as ⟦6⟧ the human component of the reasoning method has not been removed
in their approach.
During the debates I asked Saar ([2] at 1:17:55) if he could give some justification for why
one expects Bayesian reasoning to give the right answer, either in general or for this specific
application. Part of justifying a method would be to identify the potential flaws of the
method, so that one can know how to avoid them. Certainly Rootclaim are no fools, and are
aware of the importance of careful analysis; they make a point of how their conclusions are
robust against the possibility that one or more of their observations have errors. However
their conclusions remain brittle against the possibility of small, consistent bias; ⟦7⟧ a factor of 2
too generous applied to 20 observations yields million to one odds.
The goal of my calculations at the beginning of this section is to serve as a partial answer
to my question. By understanding the potential ways that the Bayesian calculation can
reach a flawed answer from valid data, we can accomplish two goals: we can reject Bayesian
27Say you make some real-world observation that appears to be a 1-in-1000 coincidence; what is the best
explanation for that observation? ⟦8⟧ The odds of a measurement error, or that you failed to understand the
situation correctly, could easily be greater than 1-in-1000. ⟦9⟧ If any particular observation carries a 95% chance
that you fully understand it and have made no error, then the greatest Bayes factor you can get out of any
single piece of evidence is 20.
arguments that are vulnerable to these flaws, and gain confidence in Bayesian arguments
that do not.
To reduce errors in Bayesian reasoning, I suggest three (four) things:
⟦10⟧ 1. Reduce one's bias. The best way to win more basketball games is to score more points
- facile and useless advice, but true.
2. Focus on only the most extreme observations: ⟦11⟧ it is harder to introduce a bias with 3
factors of 100 each than 20 factors of 2 each. Of course, this requires having extreme
observations available.
3. Alternatively, use some canonical or clearly unmotivated selection of evidence. ⟦12*⟧ Root-
claim attempts to do this by using all the evidence, which certainly would be a canon-
ical selection if it were possible; in practice I believe Rootclaim is aiming to include all
the relevant evidence, which is much harder to do without human bias interfering.
4. Conservatively add a bias towards the zero point. If the bias you deliberately add
against your side is larger than whatever bias you inadvertently add towards your side,
then your result will be conservative. ⟦13⟧ Rootclaim explicitly adds such a bias already.
⟦14⟧ Rootclaim is certainly aware of the potential for errors in Bayesian reasoning, and already
tries to follow most of my suggestions above. And perhaps I am not the right person to be
giving advice here; I do not trust myself to use a Bayesian calculation akin to Rootclaim's
for this application.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ Bayesian reasoning is best suited for dealing with a small number of strong but conflicting pieces of evidence.
⟦2⟧ Including another factor of 2 has the potential to do more harm than good if you cannot be highly confident of controlling the error.
⟦3⟧ Most likely, any naively-computed Bayes factors would have to be renormalized towards 1 to account for the steel-manning of both hypotheses.
⟦4⟧ Saar correctly observed that if you have any Bayes factors of 1000 and you are not doing a physics experiment then your calculation is probably flawed.
⟦5⟧ Rootclaim's mission is to improve upon brittle intuitive reasoning with the use of careful Bayesian calculations.
⟦6⟧ The human component of the reasoning method has not been removed in Rootclaim's approach.
⟦7⟧ A factor of 2 too generous applied to 20 observations yields million to one odds.
⟦8⟧ The odds of a measurement error, or that you failed to understand the situation correctly, could easily be greater than 1-in-1000.
⟦9⟧ If any particular observation carries a 95% chance that you fully understand it and have made no error, then the greatest Bayes factor you can get out of any single piece of evidence is 20.
⟦10⟧ To reduce errors in Bayesian reasoning, one should reduce one's bias.
⟦11⟧ It is harder to introduce a bias with 3 factors of 100 each than 20 factors of 2 each.
⟦12*⟧ Rootclaim attempts to use a canonical selection of evidence by using all the evidence.
⟦13⟧ Rootclaim explicitly adds a bias towards the zero point.
⟦14⟧ Rootclaim is aware of the potential for errors in Bayesian reasoning and tries to follow most of the suggestions for reducing errors.

* = fuzzy-matched location (quote not verbatim in the raw text above); position is approximate, snapped to the nearest word boundary
