3  Lies, damned lies, and how to get large numbers by taking powers of 2

taking powers of 2
In the space of one hundred and seventy-six years the Lower Missis-
sippi has shortened itself two hundred and forty-two miles. That is
an average of a trifle over one mile and a third per year. Therefore,
any calm person, who is not blind or idiotic, can see that ⟦1*⟧ in the Old
Oolitic Silurian Period, just a million years ago next November, the
Lower Mississippi River was upwards of one million three hundred
thousand miles long, and stuck out over the Gulf of Mexico like a
fishing-rod. And by the same token any person can see that seven
hundred and forty-two years from now the Lower Mississippi will be
only a mile and three-quarters long, and Cairo and New Orleans will
have joined their streets together, and be plodding comfortably along
under a single mayor and a mutual board of aldermen. There is some-
thing fascinating about science. One gets such wholesale returns of
conjecture out of such a trifling investment of fact. -Mark Twain [31]
Suppose you suspect something about your senator is quite odd, and perhaps they are not
human at all, but rather secretly a lizard from space. To test this, you collect 100 pieces of
data that inform the question. For many of these data points you know what to expect for
humans: how tall are they, how much do they weigh, shapes of facial features, thickness of
fingers. Of course they would not make their lizardness so obvious, so you collect data on
vocal patterns, word choices, oddities in their education history, interviews with supposed
personal friends. You collect reports on UFOs near their presumed arrival time, look for
military flight patterns, cryptic comments made by public officials around that time. Soon,
you have 100 independent observations that bear on the question.
⟦2⟧ Predictably, even if you have been completely fair in your data collection - all 100 data
points are accurate, and you did not specifically seek out information that you know will be
odd21 - if you are naive with your analysis in certain ways you will invariably conclude that
they are a lizard.
How? Well, if you use hypothesis testing, you might calculate a p-value for each of your 100
observations. Shockingly, you discover their ring finger is extremely long - at p = 0.01 it is
highly anomalous, a 1 in 100 coincidence. Clearly a lizard! This is a common trap (usually
inadvertent) called p-hacking.
⟦3⟧ Bayesian reasoning is capable of exactly the same error. For each of these observations you
compute a Bayes factor. Half of them are less anomalous than average (Bayes factor 1) and
half of them are more anomalous than average. They are only weakly anomalous - a 1 in
2 coincidence each, so Bayes factor 2 - but with 50 such pieces of weak evidence your total
Bayes factor is 2 50, totally overwhelming any prior you had against secret space lizards.
However let us be a little less reckless; after all, all of those less anomalous observations
should have had a Bayes factor smaller than 1 because they are evidence for humanity.
Recall22 we can convert Bayes factors to probabilities as:
p = 1
1 +b
so for a p-value p we can correspond the Bayes factor b = 1/p- 1. If our observations are
chosen so thatp is uniformly distributed in the range [0, 1], then b will be distributed [0,∞].
As we calculate the total log-odds by adding up each of the 100 random values of log b,
we undergo a random walk. The median step size |S| =| logb| of this random walk is
± log 3 =±1.1; the average is± log 4 =±1.39; and the variance σ2 is
Var(S) =E(S2)-E(S)2 =E(S2) =
∫ 1
(logb)2 dp = π2
3 = 3.28987
so the standard deviation is σ = 1.8138.
After 100 random steps, our final position has a variance of 100 σ2 or standard deviation of
10σ = 18.138. A Bayes factor of e18.138 gives a probability indistinguishable from certainty,
so we will most likely find strong evidence either in favor of lizardness or humanness.
21even though you only chose to start this investigation because you already had made some specific
observations that are odd!
22I am eliding some details and assumptions here; basically, I have assumed that any evidence against
humanity is for space lizards, as this maximizes the statistical power of the test. I also have a nagging
suspicion that I have omitted a factor of 2 in converting to Bayes factors, but the end result appears not to
be missing any factors of 2.
(Digression: for convenience to perform this calculation I have assumed all our observations
are numerical with known distribution. If so, the appropriate statistical test would be a
z-test (similar to a t-test) on the mean of the z scores of the observations, and not to do
any kind of Bayesian calculation at all. More likely, some of our observations will not be
numerical or come from unknown distributions, so that a z-test cannot be performed.)
However, what happens if we have a slight bias? Indeed even if all of our data points are
individually fair, we might be biased about which data points we collect.
Suppose we conveniently overlook half the data in favor of humanity; so we have two thirds
for lizards, and one thirds for humans. This may still look like we are being extremely
fair - after all, we've included 33 data points against our desired conclusion! However ⟦4⟧ the
difference is massive, because random walks add noise that scales with the square root of the
number of steps, but a biased random walk drifts at a rate that is linear with the number of
steps. ⟦5⟧ The total bias is 100
3 log 4 = 46.21, completely overwhelming any random noise (which
will also be slightly less than before, I didn't calculate how much) and leading us consistently
to the conclusion in favor of lizardness with a confidence of about e46 to 1.
Of course, such bias in the datacould also exist because lizardness is the right conclusion, and
the data is accurately reflecting that! But the analysis of any one data point, or potentially
all 100 data points, is insufficient to distinguish between a completely fair Bayesian analysis
revealing an anomaly or a slightly biased Bayesian analysis with no true signal.
(What's more, we can get qualitatively the same result using far fewer than 100 data points;
all we need is 100 potential data points. If there are 100 different ways we could make an
observation, and we ignore the 90 least interesting ones (with Bayes factors closest to 1),
they are the ones that make the smallest contribution to the final result, and most will cancel
with each other. Thus by making only 10 interesting observations we get more-or-less the
same result as if we had made 100, though with a bit more randomness.)
If instead of a haphazard collection of observations one makes a collection of evidence that
is in some way canonical it is much harder to introduce bias; say, one considers all fingers,
but only fingers.
Alternatively, while we are musing about space lizards, consider the Drake equation, which
attempts to put numbers to the Fermi paradox.23 ⟦6⟧ While people may (greatly) disagree about
the specific numbers to use for the terms of Drake equation, and vary slightly on exactly
how the Drake equation is broken down into factors, the general structure of the equation is
uncontroversial, as each factor represents an obligate step in the path from lifeless rock to
observable intelligent life.
⟦7*⟧ Similarly, if a hypothesis can be broken down into subparts, each necessary for the hypoth-
esis as a whole to hold, then there is less potential for bias in the selection of evidence,
though there may remain disagreement about the numbers assigned to the evidence or what
breakdown into subparts is cleanest.
23If each star is a potential host for intelligent alien life, and we can observe billions of stars, why do we
not observe any alien life?

Claims:
⟦1*⟧ The Lower Mississippi River was upwards of one million three hundred thousand miles long in the Old Oolitic Silurian Period, just a million years ago next November, and stuck out over the Gulf of Mexico like a fishing-rod, according to Mark Twain.
⟦2⟧ If you collect 100 independent observations that bear on the question of whether your senator is a lizard from space, and you use hypothesis testing, you will invariably conclude that they are a lizard, even if you have been completely fair in your data collection.
⟦3⟧ Bayesian reasoning is capable of the same error as hypothesis testing, where a large number of weakly anomalous observations can lead to a strong conclusion, even if each individual observation is only weakly anomalous.
⟦4⟧ A biased random walk can lead to a false conclusion, even if the individual data points are fair, because the bias can accumulate and overwhelm any random noise.
⟦5⟧ If you have a slight bias in your data collection, where you overlook half the data in favor of humanity, the total bias can be massive and lead to a consistent conclusion in favor of lizardness with high confidence.
⟦6⟧ The Drake equation, which attempts to put numbers to the Fermi paradox, has a general structure that is uncontroversial, as each factor represents an obligate step in the path from lifeless rock to observable intelligent life.
⟦7*⟧ If a hypothesis can be broken down into subparts, each necessary for the hypothesis as a whole to hold, then there is less potential for bias in the selection of evidence.

* = fuzzy-matched location (quote not verbatim in the raw text above); position is approximate, snapped to the nearest word boundary
