4.1  A model for evaluating location of the index case

To estimate this, we will describe a crude model; while we do not know the quantitative
details of the close-contact graph, fortunately our model is greatly insensitive to these details.
⟦1⟧ Suppose the shortest path from the primary case to the index case is n steps; call this the
epidemiological distance between them. Consider drawing a sphere around the primary case
that contains all people at most n steps away; certainly any random walk of length n that
starts from the primary case will end up at one of those people in the sphere, with some
nonzero probability. ⟦2⟧ Our simple model is to say that the index case follows a uniform
distribution within that sphere; that is, that the index case is equally likely to be any of the
people at most n steps from the primary case.
How good of a model is this? Well, let us consider two examples of simple graphs that might
be compared with the real-world close-contact graph.
⟦3⟧ A Bethe lattice of degree d is a tree 31 where each node has d neighbors; Bethe lattices are
infinite dimensional.32 If your social network were a Bethe lattice, then you would have 100
close contacts, and about 100 2 people within 2 steps, and 100 3 within 3 steps, and so on.
⟦4⟧ Random walks on a Bethe lattice very rapidly go away from the starting point; after n steps
you will be a maximum of n steps away from where you started, and on average be slightly
more than n(1- 2/d) steps away. Our model that the random walk ends up uniformly
distributed within a sphere of radius n is very good on a Bethe lattice.
⟦5⟧ While the real-world close-contact graph does have loops (eg, especially within a household
or workplace) respiratory diseases easily jump to strangers who will have few shared contacts.⟦6*⟧ 
On a very small scale, a Bethe lattice is a fair representation of the connectivity of close
contacts (this results in the "small-world phenomenon"). One could also imagine that each
node on the Bethe lattice represents not a person but a small collection of closely connected
people, such as a household or workplace; if so, when counting distances we would ignore
transmissions within the same group.
⟦7⟧ On a larger scale, around the size of a city, this Bethe lattice approximation breaks down,
because disease transmission is a physical process that requires proximity. As most indi-
viduals generally stay in roughly one area on the surface of the Earth during their illness,
31graph with no loops
32A graph has dimension D if the volume of a sphere of radius r scales like rD. On a Bethe lattice, the
volume of a sphere grows exponentially with radius.
the contact graph becomes approximately two-dimensional. ⟦8⟧ If we use a 2D integer lattice to
represent the contact graph at this scale, we see that diffusion is much slower; for any finite
dimension, a random walk of n steps will on average end up a distance of ∼√n from its
starting location. ⟦9⟧ Our simple model can be somewhat salvaged by using a sphere of radius√n33, though the model is less good than with the Bethe lattice. ⟦10⟧ Of course long-distance
plane travel interferes with representing the close-contact graph as a Euclidean lattice. Re-
gardless, we will not be interested in intercity transmission, so we can focus on the small
scale approximation.
⟦11⟧ Now if we have some candidate for the primary case, we want to know the probability of
observing a specific person being the index case. Had we knowledge of how many steps n
of cryptic transmission to expect, we would draw a circle 34 of radius n around the primary
case and see how many people are included; unfortunately, we do not have good information
about what to expect for n, and we do not have exact information about the contact graph.
⟦12⟧ Suppose we take a flat prior distribution forn, as we don't know what to expect. Then draw
larger and larger circles around the candidate the primary case until we first include the
index case; the radius of this smallest circle that includes the index case is a posterior best
guess for n, and the probability we expect for that index case is the inverse of the number
of people in that circle.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ The epidemiological distance between the primary case and the index case is defined as the shortest path from the primary case to the index case, denoted as n steps.
⟦2⟧ The index case follows a uniform distribution within a sphere of radius n around the primary case, meaning the index case is equally likely to be any of the people at most n steps from the primary case.
⟦3⟧ A Bethe lattice of degree d is a tree where each node has d neighbors, and Bethe lattices are infinite dimensional.
⟦4⟧ Random walks on a Bethe lattice very rapidly go away from the starting point, and after n steps, the walk will be a maximum of n steps away from where it started, and on average be slightly more than n(1- 2/d) steps away.
⟦5⟧ The real-world close-contact graph has loops, especially within a household or workplace, but respiratory diseases can easily jump to strangers who will have few shared contacts.
⟦6*⟧ On a small scale, a Bethe lattice is a fair representation of the connectivity of close contacts, resulting in the small-world phenomenon.
⟦7⟧ On a larger scale, around the size of a city, the Bethe lattice approximation breaks down because disease transmission is a physical process that requires proximity.
⟦8⟧ The contact graph becomes approximately two-dimensional at the scale of a city, and if represented as a 2D integer lattice, diffusion is much slower, with a random walk of n steps ending up a distance of ∼√n from its starting location on average.
⟦9⟧ The simple model can be somewhat salvaged by using a sphere of radius √n, although the model is less good than with the Bethe lattice.
⟦10⟧ Long-distance plane travel interferes with representing the close-contact graph as a Euclidean lattice.
⟦11⟧ Given a candidate for the primary case, the probability of observing a specific person being the index case can be estimated by drawing a circle of radius n around the primary case and calculating the inverse of the number of people in that circle.
⟦12⟧ If a flat prior distribution is taken for n, the radius of the smallest circle that includes the index case is a posterior best guess for n, and the probability expected for that index case is the inverse of the number of people in that circle.

* = fuzzy-matched location (quote not verbatim in the raw text above); position is approximate, snapped to the nearest word boundary
