4.2  Applying model to zoonotic and lab-leak hypotheses

LetZ be the event that zoonotic spillover of covid took place at an east Asian wildlife market,
andLL be the event that covid resulted as a lab-leak from a lab conducting gain-of-function
research. The observed index case is a shrimp vendor in HSM; call this observation H. We
want to estimate P (H|Z) and P (H|LL) using the model from the previous subsection. So,
for each hypothesis, how large of a circle do we have to draw around the primary case to
include the index case?
ForZ, the primary case would be any wildlife vendor at an east Asian market. We do not
have to draw a large circle to get from such a vendor to the index case; the smallest circle
we could draw would include all residents at a market which has wildlife. 35 At HSM, there
were 1162 vendors ([32] annex page 182), which we round to 1200 as that makes the numbers
easier. (When including all employees and daily visitors I imagine it would go somewhat
higher than that.)
But HSM is not the only market, and there are potential primary cases at other markets,
so our circle must include all residents at those markets as well. In their written responses,
33I found that in a d-dimensional Euclidean space, the Kullback-Leibler divergence of the true probability
distribution relative to our simple model is a rather small 1
2 log(π(d+ 2))- 1 +o(1/d). This fact is not useful
here, but after going to the trouble of calculating it I felt compelled to mention it somewhere!
34This is a circle in epidemiology space, not physically on a map.
35By "resident" I mean not just vendors but any employee or daily visitor to the market; to a first
approximation this is synonymous with "vendor". There is of course much room for variation in the choices
I am making. For example, early covid cases were concentrated on the west half of HSM, so perhaps we
should draw a smaller circle that includes only half the market. Conversely, perhaps we should be including
household members of market vendors in our circle.
⟦1⟧ Saar gives the probability of the market in question being HSM as 0.2% [7], and ⟦2⟧ Peter gives
2% [8], ⟦3⟧ so by those numbers our circle should include 60 to 600 thousand people. 36
⟦4⟧ ForLL, the primary case would be any laboratory worker at a lab doing gain-of-function
research on coronaviruses. ⟦5⟧ In Wuhan, to draw a circle large enough to include the index case
requires including the whole city, as there is no known potential chain of transmission from a
lab worker to a resident at HSM that is significantly shorter than what you might expect to
any other person in the city. ⟦6⟧ Saar guesses that 20% of such GoF research is at WIV ([1] at
2:29:30), ⟦7⟧ so multiplying the population of Wuhan by 5 suggests a circle containing 60 million
people.
⟦8⟧ Our naive analysis then yields
P (H|Z) = 1/(6· 104) to 1/(6· 105)
⟦9⟧ P (H|LL) = 1/(6· 107)
⟦10⟧ for a Bayes factor of 100 to 1000 in favor of zoonotic spillover.
⟦11⟧ Many of the inaccuracies in our model will apply equally to both Z andLL, and thus cancel
out for the purposes of calculating a Bayes factor, but not all. We have supposed that
the contact graph is homogeneous, so that everyone has the same number of contacts; but
asymmetries in the graph could potentially cause a random walk to be more likely to end
up in some places than another. 37 ⟦12⟧ Saar claims that this effect causes outbreaks to be more
likely to show up at HSM than one might expect otherwise; if so, this raises the probability
of P (H|LL), but does not change P (H|Z) because under the zoonotic hypothesis our circle
is already been restricted to HSM.
⟦13⟧ We should also ask whether our analysis should be so sensitive to who the index case is:
⟦14⟧ the earliest cases were all close in time, and under a slight change in events the earliest
among them could easily have been someone else, plausibly even someone not at HSM.
We can address this by not considering a single index case but a sort of "average" of the
earliest cases; ⟦15⟧ enough of them are HSM residents, or closely linked to HSM, that the result is
essentially the same as having a singular unambiguous index case who is a resident at HSM.
Had the earliest case data a more ambiguous nexus, this would have required more careful
analysis.
There are much more serious concerns with this analysis. ⟦16⟧ We have chosen Z to represent
zoonotic spillover at an east Asian wildlife market; if this feels arbitrary, that's because it
is. Properly the debate concerns the possibility of zoonotic spillover at any location, not
necessarily a wildlife market and not necessarily in east Asia. ⟦17⟧ Notably, Saar observes [7] the
possibility of zoonotic spillover at a restaurant that processes live animals. ⟦18⟧ If we were to
expand Z to include restaurants and locations outside of east Asia, our circle would grow
enormously, and P (H|Z) be reduced in proportion. Conversely, since we are interested in
an outbreak that we know took place in Wuhan, we could reduce Z to zoonotic spillover at
36If this feels a little high, keep in mind most wildlife markets are smaller than HSM, so this should
probably be lowered a bit.
37This is related to the well-known "friendship paradox" that most people's friends have more friends on
average than they do. [15]
HSM, or perhaps even down to a specific shop. Each of these choices for Z is fully consistent
with the parameters of the debate; which choice of Z is "correct"?
Similarly, one could ask ifLL was chosen appropriately; would we be having the same debate
if covid appeared in a different city that lacked WIV but had other research laboratories
engaged in potentially dangerous coronavirus research?
For example, restricting Z to HSM and LL to WIV we get
P (H|Z) = 1/1200
P (H|LL) = 1/(1.2· 107)
for a Bayes factor of 10000.
It is problematic for our estimates of P (H|Z) and P (H|LL) to vary by orders of magnitude
simply by taking a different perspective on the evidence: ⟦19⟧ the truth of the origin of covid
should not depend on the exact wording used by each side of the debate. The resolution to
this problem is that ⟦20⟧ as P (H|Z) varies wildly as we adjust our interpretation of the event
Z, the prior probability P (Z) varies wildly in the opposite direction. If we broaden Z to
include all sorts of potential sources around the world, P (Z) increases; if we narrow Z to a
single specific resident at HSM, P (Z) decreases in accord. ⟦21⟧ The joint probability P (H∩Z)
is in each case unchanged. 38
Therefore any discussion ofP (H|Z) andP (H|LL) is intrinsically linked to the more difficult
discussion of the prior probabilities P (Z) and P (LL). We will delay further analysis on this
to that time, in section 7.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ Saar gives the probability of the market in question being HSM as 0.2%.
⟦2⟧ Peter gives the probability of the market in question being HSM as 2%.
⟦3⟧ The circle for the zoonotic hypothesis should include 60 to 600 thousand people.
⟦4⟧ The primary case for the lab-leak hypothesis would be any laboratory worker at a lab doing gain-of-function research on coronaviruses.
⟦5⟧ To draw a circle large enough to include the index case for the lab-leak hypothesis requires including the whole city of Wuhan.
⟦6⟧ Saar guesses that 20% of gain-of-function research is at WIV.
⟦7⟧ The circle for the lab-leak hypothesis contains 60 million people.
⟦8⟧ The probability of the index case given the zoonotic hypothesis, P(H|Z), is between 1/(6· 104) and 1/(6· 105).
⟦9⟧ The probability of the index case given the lab-leak hypothesis, P(H|LL), is 1/(6· 107).
⟦10⟧ The Bayes factor is between 100 and 1000 in favor of zoonotic spillover.
⟦11⟧ Many of the inaccuracies in the model will apply equally to both the zoonotic and lab-leak hypotheses and thus cancel out for the purposes of calculating a Bayes factor.
⟦12⟧ Saar claims that asymmetries in the contact graph could cause a random walk to be more likely to end up in some places than another.
⟦13⟧ The analysis should not be sensitive to who the index case is.
⟦14⟧ The earliest cases were all close in time, and under a slight change in events the earliest among them could easily have been someone else.
⟦15⟧ Enough of the earliest cases are HSM residents or closely linked to HSM that the result is essentially the same as having a singular unambiguous index case who is a resident at HSM.
⟦16⟧ The choice of Z to represent zoonotic spillover at an east Asian wildlife market is arbitrary.
⟦17⟧ Saar observes the possibility of zoonotic spillover at a restaurant that processes live animals.
⟦18⟧ If Z is expanded to include restaurants and locations outside of east Asia, the circle would grow enormously and P(H|Z) would be reduced in proportion.
⟦19⟧ The truth of the origin of covid should not depend on the exact wording used by each side of the debate.
⟦20⟧ As P(H|Z) varies wildly as the interpretation of the event Z is adjusted, the prior probability P(Z) varies wildly in the opposite direction.
⟦21⟧ The joint probability P(H∩Z) is unchanged regardless of the interpretation of the event Z.
