4.3  Where is a person?

⟦1⟧ The distinction between residents at HSM (by which we mean any person who returns to
HSM on a daily basis, which includes vendors, other staff, and daily shoppers) and visitors
is at times subtle yet impactful. With estimated 1200 residents and perhaps 50000 weekly 39
unique visitors [7], these subpopulations disagree by a factor of 40; most of our analysis
scales linearly with population size, so using the wrong subpopulation introduces an error of
40 times.
We can imagine making a list of all people in Wuhan, and all locations in Wuhan where
that person might be. ⟦2⟧ The typical person will be strongly associated with two places, their
home and their work, 40 with weaker associations with many other places (eg markets they
shop at). Instead of talking about the index case as being a specific person, we could refer
to an "index location" where the first case cluster arises. Looking at transmission from
location to location is much harder than person to person because locations vary wildly
in how prominent they are: locations associated with more people will of course have a
38if we assume that zoonotic spillover didn't occur at a different location and then come to HSM
39I use weekly throughout as that is roughly the time scale over which a person is infectious with covid.
40This gives rise to the term "third place" to mean a location where one regularly goes to freely socialize;
a characteristic feature of such a place being that one can spontaneously interact with people there without
requiring advance planning.
much higher chance of having outbreaks. ⟦3⟧ To a first order, we can scale the probability of
an outbreak occurring at a location by the size of that location's subpopulation. Doing so
may require introducing a factor of roughly 2 to account for the fact that most people are
strongly associated with 2 locations. (We will frequently just ignore this factor of 2.) If we
include all the weekly visitors at HSM as part of its population, then we must use a much
larger adjustment factor, as the typical person is a visitor of many more than 2 locations.
While the initial outbreak at HSM includes both residents and visitors (and people who
were neither, but instead indirectly linked to HSM), ⟦4⟧ for most purposes what is relevant is
the resident population, because the epidemiological "center" of the outbreak is amongst the
residents. Throughout this analysis I will take care with which subpopulation I use, but not
go into detail of my reasoning each time.
⟦5⟧ In section 4.5 we will see Rootclaim's argument that HSM was a likely place for an earlier
outbreak to arise; a key part of that argument is the observation that HSM has "permanent
residents". In contrast, consider for example a train: an outbreak on a train will likely
be between visitors (ie passengers) who will mostly not return to the same train for further
transmission. To a first order, this is appropriately accounted for by the fact that we scale the
relevance of a location with the number of residents it has; ⟦6⟧ for a train, the "residents" would
be the train staff, which is quite a small number compared to the number of residents at
HSM, so we'd expect an outbreakamong train staff to be proportionately less likely than one
among HSM residents. This expectation does a poor job of representing a super-spreading
event that could happen among train passengers without involving the staff. However since
the real-world HSM outbreak is unambiguously centered on HSM residents, we don't have
to think too hard about how best to model such scenarios.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ The distinction between residents at HSM and visitors is subtle yet impactful, with estimated 1200 residents and perhaps 50000 weekly unique visitors, introducing an error of 40 times if the wrong subpopulation is used.
⟦2⟧ The typical person will be strongly associated with two places, their home and their work, with weaker associations with many other places.
⟦3⟧ The probability of an outbreak occurring at a location can be scaled by the size of that location's subpopulation, with a factor of roughly 2 to account for the fact that most people are strongly associated with 2 locations.
⟦4⟧ The epidemiological center of the outbreak is amongst the residents at HSM.
⟦5⟧ Rootclaim argues that HSM was a likely place for an earlier outbreak to arise, in part due to the observation that HSM has permanent residents.
⟦6⟧ The number of residents at a location is a relevant factor in determining the likelihood of an outbreak, with locations having more residents being more likely to have outbreaks.
