4.5.5  Are other diseases drawn to HSM?

⟦1⟧ Rootclaim estimates that there was a 10% chance of the first covid outbreak appearing in
HSM; their reasoning applies equally well to other respiratory diseases. We should expect,
then, that in a typical winter HSM has one of the first 10 flu outbreaks in Wuhan. Com-
parable markets elsewhere in Wuhan or in other cities should similarly be early nexuses of
flus, colds, and other diseases.
Is this true? I have no direct evidence either for or against this, but I strongly suspect
that if it were true someone would have noticed by now. China, like the US, invests in flu
surveillance and has a significant motive to identify potential infection sources or focuses.
⟦2⟧ Saar contests that the factors favoring HSM are unique to when there are very few cases
present in a city, as the high rate of visitor traffic becomes less relevant when the disease is
abundant everywhere ([4] at 20:40). ⟦3⟧ However disease transmission should remain linear at
low case counts, and nonlinearities only begin when some subpopulation has so many cases
as to create significant immunity. ⟦4⟧ If the number of infected people in a city is doubled, the
rate of outbreaks at every location is doubled, and the chance that a certain location is first
remains unchanged.
(⟦5⟧ However people have cross-year immunity to the flu and other endemic diseases, which will
slightly dampen inter-location variation in infectivity.)

Claims:
⟦1⟧ Rootclaim estimates that there was a 10% chance of the first COVID-19 outbreak appearing in Huanan Seafood Market (HSM)
⟦2⟧ The factors favoring HSM as a disease origin are unique to when there are very few cases present in a city, according to Saar
⟦3⟧ Disease transmission should remain linear at low case counts, and nonlinearities only begin when some subpopulation has so many cases as to create significant immunity
⟦4⟧ If the number of infected people in a city is doubled, the rate of outbreaks at every location is doubled, and the chance that a certain location is first remains unchanged
⟦5⟧ People have cross-year immunity to the flu and other endemic diseases, which will slightly dampen inter-location variation in infectivity
