4.5  Is covid attracted to HSM?

The simplistic model used in the previous subsection suggests that the early outbreak be-
ing observed at HSM gives a Bayes factor of 100 to 10000 in favor of Z over LL, but ⟦1⟧ in
Rootclaim's Bayesian calculation the location of the initial outbreak is counted as favoring
LL by a Bayes factor of 13.48. 42 This substantial discrepancy is largely due to a single
factor which we have not included so far: whether outbreaks are disproportionately likely
to appear in HSM compared to other locations. ⟦2⟧ Rootclaim estimated that, given that the
first cluster appeared in Wuhan, the chance of it being at HSM under LL is about 10% [7].
Since residents at HSM are 0.01% of the population of Wuhan, ⟦3⟧ this is equivalent to saying
that residents at HSM have 1000 times the chance of being the index case than the average
Wuhan resident.43
I do not think there is a 1000 times tendency towards HSM, but a smaller number might be
justifiable, so let us more carefully consider Rootclaim's argument.
⟦4⟧ The core of their argument is the claim that HSM gives uniquely good conditions for the
spread of covid between vendors. ⟦5*⟧ They identify several properties:
• "High traffic" ([1] at 3:12:00); ie, large number of unique weekly visitors
• "Permanent residents" ([1] at 3:12:00); ie, people repeatedly return to the location
• "Enclosed, poor ventilation" ([1] at 3:12:00)
• "Density" ([5] at 2:30:40); unclear what this refers to
• "Organic materials" ([5] at 2:14:36)
• "Temperature" ([5] at 2:14:00)
• "No UV radiation" ([5] at 2:14:00)
The idea is that lots of people visit HSM, so even when there are few sick people in Wuhan
there is a decent chance of one visiting the market; then if a resident becomes sick, the
resident will return to HSM to infect others; and the growing cluster of cases at HSM will
outpace infections elsewhere.
At an intuitive level these factors do not seem to especially highlight HSM: ⟦6⟧ restaurants,
schools and universities, dorms and apartment complexes, and community centers all seem
comparable to HSM in these factors. Hospitals, while usually well-ventilated, are often
42This factor comes entirely from the outbreak occurring in Wuhan, and thus proximate to the WIV, with
the specific location in Wuhan being neutral between Z and LL.
43This is difficult to reconcile with their estimate elsewhere that HSM is 10 to 4 times more likely than a
typical place to be a superspreader location ([1] at 3:14:00).
nexuses of outbreaks early in a pandemic. ⟦7⟧ Households are individually too small to have
a significant chance of being the first cluster, but are collectively likely due to the large
number of them and the quite high risk of transmission within a household. ⟦8⟧ Indeed the very
first covid cluster detected was a household cluster consisting of an elderly couple and their
asymptomatic son found by Dr Zhang; their connection to HSM was only identified later.
(⟦9⟧ I am also modestly skeptical of how true or relevant some of these factors are for HSM. While
I don't see any obvious flaw with Rootclaim's source [10] that UV radiation is correlated with
lower growth rate of covid, I am very skeptical that there is any causative relationship; in
any case, it is equally relevant for any indoors location. While more plausible than UV, the
causative role of temperature in flu transmission remains uncertain, and covid likewise. The
presence of organic materials is mostly irrelevant to human-to-human transmission which is
dominated by respiratory transmission, not fomite transmission.)
(As for the ventilation of HSM, ⟦10⟧ based on photographs it appears to be not great but not
uniquely bad; the end of each alley is open to the air, and ceilings are generally spa-
cious. Being a semi-open-air structure I would think it is better ventilated than an en-
closed building. However ⟦11*⟧ multiple independent first-hand accounts describe it as poorly-
ventilated; I'm not sure if this is in comparison to other open-air structures or in general.
A few parts of the structure, such as in the south-west, appear quite cramped and en-
closed. The building had previously had a ventilation system but it was shut down. Ex-
tensive pictures and videos can be found at http://babarlelephant.free-hoster.net/
visiting-the-wuhan-seafood-market/ .)
(In section 4.3 I briefly discussed the relevance of having "permanent residents"; this warrants
further consideration, but I lack the time.)

Claims:
⟦1⟧ Rootclaim's Bayesian calculation counts the location of the initial outbreak as favoring the lab-leak hypothesis by a Bayes factor of 13.48
⟦2⟧ The chance of the first cluster appearing at HSM under the lab-leak hypothesis is about 10% given that the first cluster appeared in Wuhan
⟦3⟧ Residents at HSM have 1000 times the chance of being the index case than the average Wuhan resident
⟦4⟧ HSM gives uniquely good conditions for the spread of covid between vendors due to several properties
⟦5*⟧ The properties that make HSM conducive to the spread of covid include high traffic, permanent residents, enclosed poor ventilation, density, organic materials, temperature, and no UV radiation
⟦6⟧ Restaurants, schools and universities, dorms and apartment complexes, and community centers are comparable to HSM in terms of factors that contribute to the spread of covid
⟦7⟧ Households are collectively likely to be the first cluster due to the large number of them and the high risk of transmission within a household
⟦8⟧ The first covid cluster detected was a household cluster consisting of an elderly couple and their asymptomatic son found by Dr Zhang
⟦9⟧ The judge is modestly skeptical of the relevance of some of the factors identified by Rootclaim, including UV radiation and temperature
⟦10⟧ The ventilation of HSM appears to be not great but not uniquely bad based on photographs
⟦11*⟧ Multiple independent first-hand accounts describe HSM as poorly-ventilated

* = fuzzy-matched location (quote not verbatim in the raw text above); position is approximate, snapped to the nearest word boundary
