4.5.3  Empirical evidence of market outbreaks

It is a great challenge to argue from first principles that a certain environment is espe-
cially conducive to covid transmission. Recall how contentious even (comparatively) easily-
measured aspects like fomite transmission or size of respiratory particles were in 2020; and
now we hope to quantify the infectivity rate of being in one particular shopping center?
Much better would be to observe empirically how covid behaves; and Rootclaim attempted to
do just that by introducing a list of known covid outbreaks in China centered at or involving
markets ([5] at 2:21:50). Here is an edited version of their list:
48We are not using Rootclaim's ascertainment rate of 1/32 because the ascertainment rate has certainly
risen by late January compared to December.
49If you feel queasy about using the geometric formula to extrapolate from daily cases to cumulative cases,
that is a sensible reaction, but we can get the same results by instead converting the model's cumulative cases
into daily cases before comparing with observations; since the model is exactly exponential, this conversion
is exactly correct. I did not do the conversion that way because the conversion is sensitive to the doubling
time, and I wanted to delay discussion of the doubling time until after the table of numbers has been made.
We would also have to deal with problems like what if the doubling time varies with time.
50Note, however, from [21]: "In its early stages, the epidemic doubled in size every 7.4 days."
location date (2020) case count market? source of index case
Xinfadi (Beijing) June 335 yes frozen food
Dalian July 144 yes frozen food
Qingdao October 14 NA frozen food
Kashgar October 428 to 430 yes "aviation container"
Tianjin November 10 NA frozen food
Shanghai November 3 NA "aviation container"
Manzhouli November 25 NA human to human
Qingdao December 2 NA cold food
Chengdu December 14 NA trash
Beijing December 3 to 41 NA human to human
Dalian December 69 NA cold items
Shenyang December 38 NA human to human
Shijiangzhuang Dec to 2021 Jan 1129 no human to human
Northeast China Dec to 2022 Jan [sic] 1650 no human to human
(Rootclaim considered only the 5 biggest outbreaks, and did not investigate the possibility
that markets could be involved in the others. Discarding the 2 and 3 person outbreaks as
irrelevant seems reasonable, but the others I am not sure about.)
Consider the three market-linked outbreaks listed above. There is an immediate problem
with Rootclaim's argument: none of them started from human to human transmission. Root-
claim needs to show that there is a high probability of an infected person going to HSM and
creating an outbreak there. ⟦1⟧ Frozen food causing an outbreak does not support Rootclaim's
case, except in so far as it demonstrates that markets can sustain an outbreak once one is
started there. Indeed it is almost inevitable to get a list of non-human-to-human outbreaks
as Rootclaim's main source for building this list is subtitled "An Overview of Environment-
To-Human Transmission Events" [16].
This is not as bad for Rootclaim as it appears. ⟦2⟧ While the outbreak in the Xinfadi market
in Beijing did appear to start from frozen salmon brought to the market, ⟦3⟧ the Dalian and
Kashgar outbreaks only secondarily involved a market, so the market index case was human
to human transmission. Let us first look at Kashgar, in Figure 7.
⟦4⟧ In the Kashgar outbreak, 75 different infected individuals attended a large farm market event
that had approximately 20 thousand participants (out of a population of 700 thousand in
Kashgar); this lead to 20 others at the market becoming infected. Of those 20, 5 attended
a wedding, leading to 36 infections at that wedding; ⟦5⟧ this makes weddings appear to be a far
greater risk of spreading covid than markets. ⟦6⟧ Arguably the R0 at the market is less than 1.
This would be a relevant analog to the HSM outbreak if half a million people came to HSM
in one day, and more people brought the illness to it than from it.
The Dalian outbreak is more favorable to Rootclaim. The only source I have is an article in
China Daily [38]:
Farm produce markets and buses have become "amplifiers" in the
spread of COVID-19 during the latest outbreak in Dalian, Liaoning
Figure 7: Outbreak in Kashgar. This is Figure 1 of [36].
province, a local disease control expert said.
On Thursday, the city reported three confirmed COVID-19 cases,
including one previously reported as an asymptomatic infection, along
with 112 asymptomatic carriers, the city's COVID-19 prevention and
control headquarters said on Friday.
"It is quite different from previous outbreaks in our city, which re-
ported sporadic cases. The latest one mainly influenced the downtown
regions and was amplified through places like farm produce markets,"
Meng Jun, deputy director of the Dalian center for disease control and
prevention, told Dalian Daily on Thursday.
Genetic sequencing found that the cases reported since Aug 26 were
highly homologous to those found in Dalian since Aug 20. ⟦7*⟧ Preliminary
results showed the source was accidental exposure of non-closed-loop
management personnel in a centralized isolation hotel for interna-
tional travelers.
Infected people, reported since Aug 20, had visited the Taoyuan mar-
ket, a well-known market with fresh vegetables, meat, seafood and
groceries.
"⟦8⟧ Some cases since Aug 26 are owners or customers of the market.
Therefore, they belong to the same outbreak, introduced by infected
people into the Taoyuan market, which then became an amplifier and
spread out," Meng said.
[...] Meng said genetic sequencing had identified the virus responsible
for the outbreak as a mutation of the Omicron subvariant BA.5.2.1,
which is more contagious and harder to discover.
⟦9⟧ However it is impossible to draw any conclusions from the text above, as it is far too vague.
Moreover, omicron did not exist in 2020 July; the article appears to refer to an unrelated
outbreak 2 years later. There is no reason to think the 2020 July outbreak involves a market.
In sum, the empirical evidence of market outbreaks show one outbreak in 2022 August with
a vague description of being amplified by "buses" and "places like farm produce markets",
and the 2020 June outbreak in Xinfadi which started due to frozen food in a market. Neither
is a good analogy for Rootclaim's claimed account of events in HSM. ⟦10⟧ In the meantime, China
had at least a dozen non-market outbreaks in 2020, and many more since then.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ The presence of COVID-19 outbreaks in markets in China does not necessarily support Rootclaim's argument that human-to-human transmission occurred in these markets.
⟦2⟧ The outbreak in the Xinfadi market in Beijing started from frozen salmon brought to the market.
⟦3⟧ The Dalian outbreak involved a market, but the market index case was human-to-human transmission.
⟦4⟧ In the Kashgar outbreak, 75 different infected individuals attended a large farm market event with approximately 20 thousand participants, leading to 20 others at the market becoming infected.
⟦5⟧ Weddings appear to be a far greater risk of spreading COVID-19 than markets, based on the Kashgar outbreak.
⟦6⟧ The R0 at the market in the Kashgar outbreak is arguably less than 1.
⟦7*⟧ The source of the outbreak in Dalian was accidental exposure of non-closed-loop management personnel in a centralized isolation hotel for international travelers.
⟦8⟧ The outbreak in Dalian involved a market, with some cases being owners or customers of the Taoyuan market.
⟦9⟧ The article about the Dalian outbreak refers to an unrelated outbreak 2 years later and does not provide evidence for a market outbreak in 2020 July.
⟦10⟧ China had at least a dozen non-market outbreaks in 2020, and many more since then.

* = fuzzy-matched location (quote not verbatim in the raw text above); position is approximate, snapped to the nearest word boundary
