4.6.3  Covid testing of animal vendors

⟦1⟧ Rootclaim claims that no animal vendors at HSM tested positive for covid, in contrast to ⟦2⟧ a
significant association between people who worked with wild animals and seropositivity for
SARS-1 ([1] at 3:07:50, [5] at 1:46:00, [13]).
There are two reasons I do not find significance in this. First, as with the animals themselves,
I would not particularly expect to find a trend connecting animal vendors with testing
positive for covid even if sars-cov-2 did spill over at HSM. ⟦3⟧ Only one animal vendor would
have been directly infected by an animal (or two if there were two spillovers, as discussed
in section 5.1), with further infections being evenly distributed between all sorts of vendors,
with a slight bias towards animal vendors as they are loosely clustered in the west half of
HSM.
As early cases have a lower ascertainment rate, we expect a low chance that the primary case
would be ascertained directly: roughly 5%, the hospitalization rate. ⟦4⟧ In the 95% chance that
the primary case was not hospitalized, we have no strong reason to be looking specifically to
animal vendors to find early infections.
Second, it is not clear to me that the claim is true. Rootclaim gives no source for the assertion.
⟦5⟧ Presumably if this information is available at all, the source would have to be the WHO
report, which has a near monopoly on data on early cases, along with other publications
co-authored by members of the WHO investigative team. ⟦6⟧ The HSM map published by the
WHO labels 10 stalls known to sell live animals, and does not show any cases at those stalls;
this makes me think it is probably true ([32] page 46; or see section B.2). However I could
not find any explicit mention in the text that no animal vendors were positive,58 despite very
lengthy discussion of testing of the animals themselves, and the WHO report only specifies
the types of goods vendors sell in a very few cases. ⟦7⟧ It does say that 20 of 168 December cases
self-report exposure to live animals ([32] page 45), but does not clarify how many of those
were at HSM, nor the nature of that exposure (could it include pets? but would only 11.8%
of people have pets?). The breakdown of all vendors at HSM by type of goods sold ([32]
annex page 182) does not mention live animals at all; perhaps this is included in "others",
or perhaps they are included in meat sellers if the animals are being butchered on site, or
perhaps the live animal sellers also sold other products.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ No animal vendors at Huanan Seafood Market (HSM) tested positive for COVID-19, according to Rootclaim.
⟦2⟧ There is a significant association between people who worked with wild animals and seropositivity for SARS-1.
⟦3⟧ Only one animal vendor would have been directly infected by an animal if SARS-CoV-2 did spill over at HSM.
⟦4⟧ The primary case of COVID-19 at HSM would have a low chance of being ascertained directly, roughly 5%, which is the hospitalization rate.
⟦5⟧ The World Health Organization (WHO) report has a near monopoly on data on early cases of COVID-19.
⟦6⟧ The HSM map published by the WHO labels 10 stalls known to sell live animals, and does not show any cases at those stalls.
⟦7⟧ 20 of 168 December cases self-report exposure to live animals, according to the WHO report.
