4  Location, location, location

You've just got home from a long day of hugging animals and taste-testing lab samples when
you realize you're feeling a bit under the weather. Congratulations: you are the primary
case28 in a new global pandemic! What happens next?
⟦1⟧ Most people in your position do not pass on their illness to others, 29 but to result in a global
pandemic you would have to pass it on to one or more of your close contacts. Depending on
your activities, you could easily have dozens or hundreds of potential transmissible contacts
over the course of your illness; a few will be household members or coworkers, but the
great majority often being strangers encountered in public. Of course, such contacts are not
equally likely to acquire your illness.
To simplify matters, let us say you, and everyone else, have 100 potential contacts that do
not vary with time and are equally likely to become ill. 30 We can build a massive graph
whose vertices are all the people in the world and edges represent close contacts. On this
28I originally erroneously used the ambiguous term "patient zero" here. ⟦2*⟧ Fun fact: the term "patient
zero" arose as a misreading of "patient O[ut of California]", referring to an early known case of HIV not in
California.
29⟦3⟧ or, at least the chain of transmission usually stops relatively soon
30If you wish to account for the fact that contacts are not equally likely to become ill, everywhere below
replace each mention of "an individual has 100 potential contacts" with "the probability distribution of
which contact(s) will become ill has entropy log(100)".
graph we can track the path of a chain of disease transmission, ⟦4⟧ though of course for the
disease to grow to become a pandemic there will be more than one transmission chain going
on at the same time.
⟦5⟧ Each successive transmission, as you pass it on to one of your close contacts, who passes it to
one of theirs, acts as a random walk over the graph of close contacts. After some interval of
time, the disease is discovered in the index case (ie, the first observed case). What we want
to know is, for a particular hypothetical primary case, what is the probability distribution
of who will be the index case?

Claims:
⟦1⟧ Most people in the position of being the primary case in a new global pandemic do not pass on their illness to others
⟦2*⟧ The term 'patient zero' arose as a misreading of 'patient O[ut of California]', referring to an early known case of HIV not in California
⟦3⟧ The chain of transmission from the primary case usually stops relatively soon
⟦4⟧ For a disease to grow and become a pandemic, there will be more than one transmission chain going on at the same time
⟦5⟧ Each successive transmission of a disease acts as a random walk over the graph of close contacts

* = fuzzy-matched location (quote not verbatim in the raw text above); position is approximate, snapped to the nearest word boundary
