5.1  Were there two spillovers?

As we saw in section 1.2, ⟦1⟧ the early sars-cov-2 genomes can be neatly organized into two
distinct taxa,59 called lineages A and B. ⟦2⟧ Each of these taxa has an unambiguous root, whose
genomes differ by exactly two nucleotides: lineage A having T8782, C28144 (which we will
call "T/C") and lineage B having C8782, T28144 ("C/T"). ⟦3⟧ This is an unusual phylogenetic
structure that cannot be easily explained by either the zoonotic nor lab leak hypotheses.
Simple analyses like minimum spanning tree can construct a reasonable unrooted phyloge-
netic tree, but do not help identify the root. As few or no early intermediate samples (T/T
and C/C) are known, a simple geometric argument suggests that it is very unlikely the root
is an intermediate genome. While coronaviruses differ in what nucleotides they have at these
two positions, ⟦4⟧ the closest relatives to sars-cov-2 are in agreement with lineage A, so outgroup
analysis suggests that lineage A is the root of sars-cov-2. Conversely, ⟦5⟧ when considering the
collection dates of early sars-cov-2 samples, it appears that lineage B may predate lineage A
by a few days or weeks and would therefore be the root.
⟦6⟧ Pekar et al [27] suggests a different possibility: what if lineages A and B represent separate
introductions of sars-cov-2 into humans? They find in simulations that it is unlikely for a
single introduction to yield a phylogenetic tree with two clearly distinct and prominent taxa
whose roots are exactly two mutations apart; when this does happen, it is usually because
58Despite reading it multiple times I could easily have missed it - it's 300 pages long!
59Well, I think "taxon" is not usually used below the species level; I would say "clades", but one of them
is not monophyletic.
an early infection underwent two successive mutations rapidly. ⟦7⟧ On this basis they argue that
two separate introductions better explains the observed phylogenetic evidence.
⟦8⟧ If true, and sars-cov-2 underwent multiple introductions into humans, then we could be all
but certain that the zoonotic hypothesis is correct. However, there are several weaknesses
in the argument of Pekar et al. ⟦9⟧ One significant issue is that their simulations [24] appear
(if I understand correctly) to model disease transmission as following a poisson distribution,
⟦10⟧ whereas real-world transmission of covid may substantially involve sporadic super-spreading
events, leading to a much more clumpy structure in the resulting phylogenetic tree.
⟦11⟧ A much more serious objection is that the two-introductions hypothesis does nothing by
itself to explain the strange shape of the phylogenetic tree. Regardless of the number of
introductions, both taxa definitely belong to a single tree; labeling certain nodes in the tree
as "animal host" or "human host" does not change the shape of the tree. The only way
that the number of introductions is relevant is if disease transmission has different dynamics
in animals and humans. While this is likely to be true, Pekar et al does not explore this
distinction, nor make any attempt to model covid transmission amongst animals. For the
two-introductions hypothesis to make any sense, we must suppose that animal-to-human
transmission is comparatively rare, and that covid was circulating in a small reservoir of
animals; this is plausible, but significant work remains to quantify how well this hypothesis
explains the data relative to other hypotheses.
⟦12⟧ I find myself intrigued but unconvinced by the possibility that there were multiple introduc-
tions of sars-cov-2 into humans.
⟦13⟧ If I had to guess whether lineage A or lineage B were ancestral, I would be inclined to believe
Pekar et al that lineage B is more likely to be ancestral; while other researchers identified
lineage A as ancestral, their work was more broadly looking at the whole phylogenetic tree
for sars-cov-2 rather than narrowly focused on this single question. Fortunately I don't have
to make such a guess. The most likely explanation for the lab leak hypothesis involves an
early case going to HSM and starting a cluster of covid cases; if so, the shape of the phyloge-
netic tree will be essentially indistinguishable from that of the single-introduction zoonotic
hypothesis. Neither hypothesis well explains the observation of early covid cases cleanly
being grouped into two distinct taxa. While the zoonotic hypothesis does not explain why
lineage A was mostly absent from HSM, the lab leak hypothesis does not explain why early
lineage A cases were initially found near HSM, so again neither hypothesis does particularly
well here.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ The early SARS-CoV-2 genomes can be neatly organized into two distinct taxa, called lineages A and B.
⟦2⟧ Each of the two taxa has an unambiguous root, whose genomes differ by exactly two nucleotides: lineage A having T8782, C28144 and lineage B having C8782, T28144.
⟦3⟧ The phylogenetic structure of SARS-CoV-2 cannot be easily explained by either the zoonotic nor lab leak hypotheses.
⟦4⟧ Outgroup analysis suggests that lineage A is the root of SARS-CoV-2.
⟦5⟧ Lineage B may predate lineage A by a few days or weeks and would therefore be the root.
⟦6⟧ Pekar et al suggests that lineages A and B represent separate introductions of SARS-CoV-2 into humans.
⟦7⟧ Pekar et al argues that two separate introductions better explain the observed phylogenetic evidence.
⟦8⟧ If SARS-CoV-2 underwent multiple introductions into humans, then we could be all but certain that the zoonotic hypothesis is correct.
⟦9⟧ The simulations of Pekar et al appear to model disease transmission as following a Poisson distribution.
⟦10⟧ Real-world transmission of COVID-19 may substantially involve sporadic super-spreading events, leading to a much more clumpy structure in the resulting phylogenetic tree.
⟦11⟧ The two-introductions hypothesis does nothing by itself to explain the strange shape of the phylogenetic tree.
⟦12⟧ The judge finds themselves intrigued but unconvinced by the possibility that there were multiple introductions of SARS-CoV-2 into humans.
⟦13⟧ The judge would be inclined to believe that lineage B is more likely to be ancestral.
