5.3  CGGCGG

Much attention has been drawn to the sars-cov-2 FCS, shown below as found in the Wuhan-
Hu-1 reference sample [25]:
CAG ACT CAG ACT AAT TCT CCT CGG CGG GCA CGT AGT GTA GCT AGT
Q T Q T N S P R R A R S V A S
Recall the RRAR sequence is the FCS, with the putative insert relative to the closest known
viruses being T CCT CGG CGG GC (or perhaps CCT CGG CGG GCA ).
There are six different codons that code the arginine amino acid; in sars-cov-2 and similar
viruses, ⟦1⟧ CGG is the rarest of the six possible encodings of arginine, at only 3-5%. ⟦2⟧ Rootclaim
argues that this is evidence against a natural origin to the FCS, as it has two consecutive
CGG codons.
However, I would not expect a priori the codon frequency in an insert to match that of
the surrounding genome, but rather to reflect the frequency of the source of the fragment;
⟦3⟧ note that CGG is the most common encoding of arginine in humans, for example. ⟦4⟧ The main
reason CGG is rare in sars-like viruses is that there is a mutational bias against the C and G
nucleotides; ⟦5⟧ C is the rarest at 18.4% of nucleotides in Wuhan-Hu-1, followed by G at 19.6%,
whereas A has 29.9% and T has 32.1% [25]. After a fragment from an outside source has
been inserted, it takes time for this mutational bias to impact the novel fragment.
Furthermore, if the fragment was inserted naturally, we do not know if the source had the
same alignment, or even was a coding region at all. We would have to analyze the frequency
of the non-aligned codons to properly assess the likelihood of the CGGCGG sequence from a
natural source.
⟦6⟧ I do not see any particular significance to the CGGCGG sequence. It is slightly odd, but one
expects to observe many slightly odd things through random chance.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ The CGG codon is the rarest of the six possible encodings of arginine in SARS-CoV-2 and similar viruses, at only 3-5%.
⟦2⟧ The presence of two consecutive CGG codons in the SARS-CoV-2 FCS is evidence against a natural origin to the FCS, according to Rootclaim.
⟦3⟧ The CGG codon is the most common encoding of arginine in humans.
⟦4⟧ There is a mutational bias against the C and G nucleotides in SARS-like viruses.
⟦5⟧ The frequency of nucleotides in Wuhan-Hu-1 is 18.4% C, 19.6% G, 29.9% A, and 32.1% T.
⟦6⟧ The judge does not see any particular significance to the CGGCGG sequence.
