7.2  Lab leak prior

To estimate P (LL), rather than extrapolating from historical lab leak events, I will work
forwards from first principles. This is an error-prone approach, not just because it requires
speculating about the activities and safety of a lab I have no first- or second-hand knowledge
of, but also because any errors introduced are unlikely to cancel out with errors in P (Z).
However this is necessary as I know no analogous precedent for LL.
As my numbers are more-or-less conjecture from thin air, I will just give them in tabular
form:
⟦1⟧ WIV conducts GoF research a la "DEFUSE" 1/50
⟦2⟧ (annualized) 1/1.7
⟦3⟧ WIV uses suitable starting virus 1/2
⟦4⟧ WIV research is successful 1/2
⟦5⟧ lab leak of that virus occurs at WIV 1/50
⟦6⟧ The Project DEFUSE research plan [14, 20] looks eerily similar, in parts, to sars-cov-2.
⟦7⟧ However following Project DEFUSE exactly is not consistent with LL. Here are some of the
most important discrepancies:
• Project DEFUSE was a collaboration of multiple research groups; but the more people
involved, the easier for people to become aware of the research
• most of the work, including all work on virus chimeras, was to be done in UNC or
other US labs
69The proper way to include this is to first estimate the chance of spillover at HSM excluding Holmes's
prognostication, second estimate the chance the spillover site would have been successfully forecast (and
applying a Bonferroni correction), then take some sort of average of these two estimates according to your
relative confidence in them.
• the project was planned to last 3.5 years
• the project was interested in viruses related to sars-cov-1
• the project planned on using backbones from previously known viruses, selected for
lack of pandemic potential in humans
⟦8⟧ For LL to occur, WIV had to undertake the contents of Project DEFUSE alone without
collaborators (presumably their former collaborators would know of a falling out between
them?), abandon the idea of using wild viruses closely related to sars-cov-1, use wild back-
bones instead of safe backbones, and rush the project in half the proposed time. It is also
necessary for WIV to keep the elements of the proposal that are in accord with sars-cov-2
without alteration. The only known precedent for activities like this taking place at WIV
is the construction of a chimera of the WIV1 backbone with spike gene collected from wild
viruses; I know of no precedent for WIV inserting FCSs, filtering viruses based on infectivity,
nor using wild-type backbones. ⟦9⟧ I find the probability of all of this to be at most 1/50.
That gives the probability of WIV undertaking the GoF research as described, but we want
an annual risk. ⟦10⟧ Assuming a Poisson distribution of lab leaks with unknown parameter, ⟦11⟧ after
1.7 years the annualized probability of the first lab leak occurring is at most 1 per 1.7 years.
Under LL, WIV must find and choose a sufficiently dangerous virus to start with, which at
minimum requires such a virus to exist. Arguably the latter is the same factor of 1 /8 as
fromZ, but I have weakened this to 1/2 as GoF research lowers how dangerous the starting
point would need to be. ⟦12⟧ This assumes that WIV is able to find the virus, though in reality
only a small fraction of wild viruses are ever sampled.
Finally, we estimate the chance of the virus actually escaping. ⟦13⟧ Rootclaim describes this
as almost certainty once sars-cov-2 is manufactured, but I cannot take this seriously when
Rootclaim does not quantify the risk of a outbreak of covid at the lab origin, and suggests
that 128 sick people in Wuhan might lead only to a cluster at HSM. Even supposing WIV
chose not to use a pseudovirus and performed aerosol-generating procedures on the virus
under BSL-2 conditions, is this riskier than having a colleague with covid? However likely it
is for a researcher to get covid from a vial in a fume hood, it seems far more likely to get it
from a fellow researcher - they aren't bringing their BSL-2 equipment out to group dinners.
⟦14⟧ The chance of a lab leak is surely lower than the chance that leak is followed by a outbreak
in the lab, and Rootclaim finds the latter to be too low to be noteworthy.
⟦15⟧ Also, while lab leaks of infectious agents do happen, they still are very rare, especially if you
restrict to lab leaks that had secondary infections; there are many virology labs, and most
have never experienced a leak. ⟦16⟧ I cannot put the probability above 1 /50; I think it is lower,
and only put it so high as sars-cov-2 is uncommonly contagious.
Putting these together, we get
⟦17⟧ P (LL) = 1
50· 1
1.7· 1
2· 1
2· 1
50 = 1
17000.
⟦18⟧ Compared to P (Z), we see P (LL) is twice as high. While zoonotic pandemics are much
more likely than GoF lab leak pandemics globally, the latter tends to happen in Wuhan
more often than the former. My intuition is that the Bayes factor P (LL)/P (Z) = 2 I
calculated is grossly too high.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ The judge estimates the probability of the Wuhan Institute of Virology (WIV) conducting GoF research as 1/50
⟦2⟧ The judge estimates the annualized probability of the WIV conducting GoF research as 1/1.7
⟦3⟧ The judge estimates the probability of the WIV using a suitable starting virus as 1/2
⟦4⟧ The judge estimates the probability of the WIV research being successful as 1/2
⟦5⟧ The judge estimates the probability of a lab leak of the virus occurring at the WIV as 1/50
⟦6⟧ The Project DEFUSE research plan looks eerily similar to SARS-CoV-2 in parts
⟦7⟧ Following Project DEFUSE exactly is not consistent with the lab-leak hypothesis
⟦8⟧ The judge argues that for the lab-leak hypothesis to occur, the WIV had to undertake the contents of Project DEFUSE alone without collaborators
⟦9⟧ The judge estimates the probability of all the necessary conditions for the lab-leak hypothesis to be at most 1/50
⟦10⟧ The judge assumes a Poisson distribution of lab leaks with unknown parameter
⟦11⟧ The judge estimates the annualized probability of the first lab leak occurring to be at most 1 per 1.7 years
⟦12⟧ The judge estimates the probability of the WIV finding and choosing a sufficiently dangerous virus to start with as 1/2
⟦13⟧ Rootclaim describes the chance of SARS-CoV-2 escaping from a lab as almost certainty once it is manufactured
⟦14⟧ The judge argues that the chance of a lab leak is lower than the chance that a leak is followed by an outbreak in the lab
⟦15⟧ Lab leaks of infectious agents are very rare, especially if restricted to lab leaks that had secondary infections
⟦16⟧ The judge estimates the probability of a lab leak to be no higher than 1/50
⟦17⟧ The judge calculates the probability of the lab-leak hypothesis (P(LL)) to be 1/17000
⟦18⟧ The judge finds that the probability of the lab-leak hypothesis (P(LL)) is twice as high as the probability of the zoonotic hypothesis (P(Z))
