A.2  Connor Reed

⟦1⟧ Connor Reed was a 25 year old British man living in Wuhan who claims he became ill with
covid on 2019 November 25. In interviews, he says he went to the hospital and was tested
on December 6, and ⟦2⟧ he was told that the test came back positive for covid on 2020 January
16.
If I believed every anecdotal story I saw related on the internet of people contracting covid,
I could point to a swathe of covid cases worldwide that preceded the lockdown of Wuhan.
⟦3⟧ There are far more people who believe they acquired covid in 2019 than ever did have covid
in 2019. Nevertheless, ⟦4⟧ Reed's story is more credible 74 than others', as he was willing to put
his name to it, gave substantive details in interviews with the press, and claimed to have
received a positive test result.
⟦5⟧ It is unlikely for a 25-year-old with covid to be hospitalized. Furthermore, ⟦6⟧ Reed described
his illness as undergoing multiple recoveries and relapses, so even if his story is accurate we
only know that he had covid as early as December 6, which could have been the last of a
succession of two or more unrelated illnesses.
⟦7⟧ It is also unlikely for the index case of covid to be a British man. ⟦8⟧ English-speaking residents
in Wuhan are much more likely to be interviewed by Western journalists; this introduces a
strong selection bias as to which cases are ascertained by Western newspapers. While this
selection bias is equally strong for true and falsely believed cases of covid, ⟦9⟧ the fact that
British newspapers were able to locate a British index case should raise our prior belief that
a significant fraction of people are willing to falsely believe that they had covid.
74or less non-credible
⟦10⟧ If Reed is telling the truth that his samples tested positive in a retrospective search conducted
by the hospital he went to, then why does no retrospective search contain his case? This
necessitates the existence of unpublished retrospective searches.
⟦11⟧ I do not believe Connor Reed acquired covid on November 25.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ Connor Reed, a 25 year old British man living in Wuhan, claims he became ill with covid on 2019 November 25.
⟦2⟧ Connor Reed was told that the test came back positive for covid on 2020 January 16.
⟦3⟧ There are far more people who believe they acquired covid in 2019 than ever did have covid in 2019.
⟦4⟧ Connor Reed's story is more credible than others' because he was willing to put his name to it, gave substantive details in interviews with the press, and claimed to have received a positive test result.
⟦5⟧ It is unlikely for a 25-year-old with covid to be hospitalized.
⟦6⟧ Connor Reed described his illness as undergoing multiple recoveries and relapses.
⟦7⟧ The index case of covid is unlikely to be a British man.
⟦8⟧ English-speaking residents in Wuhan are much more likely to be interviewed by Western journalists, introducing a strong selection bias.
⟦9⟧ The fact that British newspapers were able to locate a British index case should raise our prior belief that a significant fraction of people are willing to falsely believe that they had covid.
⟦10⟧ If Connor Reed is telling the truth that his samples tested positive in a retrospective search conducted by the hospital he went to, then unpublished retrospective searches must exist.
⟦11⟧ The judge does not believe that Connor Reed acquired covid on November 25.
