A.3  Mahjong hall

⟦1⟧ Rootclaim identified the possibility that the mahjong room in HSM may have been a nexus
of early covid cases. I think there are two facets to their tentative argument; one, anecdotal
observations linking early covid cases to the mahjong room; and two, a supposition that the
mahjong room would have an unusually high rate of disease transmission.
I think neither facet is sufficiently substantiated. ⟦2⟧ Rootclaim claims that at least 35 early
covid cases have been linked to the mahjong room or mahjong players in some way ([1]
at 3:17:30). As far as I can tell, this number is reached by adding up each of the listed
anecdotes. 27 of these come from a single source, a Chinese-language video that I cannot
evaluate, or even verify the quote is in the video. None of the sources are reliable, being
indirect anecdotes with no identifying details and few specifics. I do not see any attempt
to de-duplicate individuals that might have appeared in multiple anecdotes, nor compare
against the background rate of mahjong players.
⟦3⟧ While the HSM mahjong room would be more conducive to disease transmission than the
shops, I don't see a reason it would be especially outstanding, nor in comparison to mahjong
rooms (or bars, restaurants, etc.) elsewhere in Wuhan, which are numerous. ⟦4⟧ And regardless
of how infective the room may be, its effect is limited to people physically in the room, which
appears not to have been many:
⟦5⟧ The shopkeeper mentioned an illicit mah-jongg parlor in the seafood
market. "I heard that four people were playing at one table, and all
four got sick," he said.
[...] By then, the journalist had heard about a possible virus, and also
about some mah-jongg infections. ⟦6⟧ He found the players unfazed by
the rumors, still gambling for small stakes. ⟦7⟧ "It was kind of a secret
room," the journalist said. [...] "It was next to the public toilet, and
you had to climb a ladder to get there. You wouldn't find it unless
you were looking for it. Everybody was smoking and there was no
ventilation." [18]
Out of thoroughness I read each of the six sources provided in so far as I could:
• the New Yorker article quoted above; it contains fourth-hand accounts which were
related in 2020 August.
• a Chinese-language video
• an Australian reporter who met a Wuhan resident who said their friend is (as of 2020
January 22) in the hospital with covid and thinks he may have gotten it while playing
mahjong, with no further detail. This is well over a month after the time relevant to
the HSM outbreak.
• a contemporaneous Chinese-language news report with many interviews with employees
at HSM; based on a machine-translation, it contains two references to shopkeepers
playing cards but does not mention mahjong. I do not think it is fair to translate the
characters "
 " ("play cards") as "play mahjong" without context to indicate that it
is specifically mahjong being referred to. Even still, one instance refers to "three shop
owners who often played cards at the stalls near tenth street", which is not near the
mahjong room on fifth or sixth street.
• two Chinese-language news reports which machine translation failed on
The only source I could read that referred to illnesses that could even be compatible with the
HSM mahjong room and in a relevant time period is the New Yorker article; I have quoted
the relevant portion of it in full. It is also the only source that makes specific reference to
the HSM mahjong room.
⟦8⟧ While it is certainly possible that the HSM mahjong room played a role in the HSM outbreak,
there are no first-hand accounts of mahjong players with covid, no non-anecdotal accounts,
and no known specific individuals who played mahjong and acquired covid. The only evidence
is a single sentence published almost a year after the events in question with a fourth-hand
anecdotal account of non-specific people.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ Rootclaim identified the possibility that the mahjong room in Huanan Seafood Market (HSM) may have been a nexus of early COVID-19 cases.
⟦2⟧ Rootclaim claims that at least 35 early COVID-19 cases have been linked to the mahjong room or mahjong players in some way.
⟦3⟧ The HSM mahjong room would be more conducive to disease transmission than the shops.
⟦4⟧ The HSM mahjong room's effect is limited to people physically in the room, which appears not to have been many.
⟦5⟧ The shopkeeper mentioned an illicit mah-jongg parlor in the seafood market where four people playing at one table all got sick.
⟦6⟧ The journalist found mah-jongg players unfazed by rumors of a possible virus and still gambling for small stakes.
⟦7⟧ The mahjong room was a secret room next to the public toilet with no ventilation and everybody was smoking.
⟦8⟧ There are no first-hand accounts of mahjong players with COVID-19, no non-anecdotal accounts, and no known specific individuals who played mahjong and acquired COVID-19.
