C  Excluded information

⟦1⟧ Crucially for fairness of the debate, I was not permitted to base my decision on independent
research beyond what the participants of the debate did. This gives the participants oppor-
tunity to identify flaws or rebut any information presented against their side. ⟦2⟧ However for
the purposes of the exposition within this report I have not so limited myself, mostly for the
purposes of filling in minor details that do not influence the debate outcome. 76 For example,
while both sides of the debate estimated there were about 1000 vendors at HSM, the WHO
76For example, ⟦3⟧ at times when the debate participants cited secondary sources for a statement I would
follow references back to a primary source to validate it before including and citing it in this ⟦4*⟧ document.
report annex page 182 [32] gives a more exact figure of 1162 vendors, which I freely use
instead of 1000.
However some of the information I encountered does appear to directly bear on the central
topic of the debate; I did not want to exclude it from the report, but the reader should
realize it has been subjected to a lower level of critical scrutiny than the rest of the report,
and may exhibit selection bias.
(What does it mean to "exclude" information? I have generally been using any material
found in any reference from either party, so by that standard something in the annexes of
the WHO report should be included. However, amongst the thousands of pages of reference
material, it seems likely that one or both parties could have overlooked something 100 pages
deep into a supplementary materials section. What is important to me is the balance between
the level of scrutiny a claim received in the debate and how contentious that claim is; ⟦5⟧ highly
contentious claims that faced no scrutiny will be treated with extreme skepticism. This is
not a binary distinction where evidence is treated with full credulity just because it lies
inside some fixed boundary line.)

Claims:
⟦1⟧ The judge was not permitted to base their decision on independent research beyond what the participants of the debate did.
⟦2⟧ The judge used information from outside the debate for the purposes of filling in minor details that do not influence the debate outcome.
⟦3⟧ The judge followed references back to a primary source to validate statements cited by debate participants from secondary sources.
⟦4*⟧ The World Health Organization report annex page 182 gives a figure of 1162 vendors at HSM.
⟦5⟧ The judge treats highly contentious claims that faced no scrutiny with extreme skepticism.

* = fuzzy-matched location (quote not verbatim in the raw text above); position is approximate, snapped to the nearest word boundary
