5.2  Spatial distribution of lineages A and B

Among people who had onset of covid in 2019 December, 13 people had sars-cov-2 samples
sequenced; 11 of these people had a known epidemiological association with HSM ([32] page
76). 12 of the 13 samples were found to be lineage B. This raises the obvious question: where
was the lineage A?
More specifically, all 11 associated with HSM (onset dates: Dec 13, 17, 19, 20, 20, 20, 20,
22, 23, 23, 23) were lineage B, whereas of the other two cases, one (onset date Dec 16 60) was
lineage B and one (onset date Dec 26) was not. This gives the rather more pointed question
- why was there no lineage A in HSM?
The lab leak theory has an elegant explanation for this: based on outgroup analysis, it
appears that lineage A is ancestral to lineage B, so presumably it was lineage A that was
leaked from WIV. One of the lineage A descendants mutated to become the root of lineage
B, which would include the HSM primary case. Thus, the HSM outbreak, and all cases
descended from the HSM primary case, would be entirely lineage B, whereas Wuhan as a
whole would have a mix of the two lineages.
The zoonotic theory does not have a clean explanation for this observation. The most
obvious, and simplest, is to suppose that lineage B was ancestral, so there were fewer lineage
A cases, and by chance did not include any of the 11 associated with HSM. The sample size
involved is so small that this could easily be simple coincidence. Supposing we knew that 1
of the 13 early cases were lineage A, and we were then to ask the chance of the observation
that all 13 HSM cases were lineage B, we would get a p-value of 2 /13 = 0.154, which is not
so unlikely.
An alternative way of regarding the situation is that if the primary covid case were in HSM,
then the genetic diversity of sars-cov-2 within HSM should be equal to the genetic diversity
within all of Wuhan. Observing that the one lineage A case was not in HSM is weak, but
nonzero, evidence that the genetic diversity within HSM is lower than that of Wuhan as a
whole, and therefore that HSM is not the origin of the pandemic.
However the lab leak explanation for this observation is not consistent with further observa-
tions. A glove in HSM (shop 7:15,17) was tested for covid, and was the one environmental
sample to be sequenced with lineage A (out of four environmental samples in HSM that were
sequenced). An employee of this shop became ill with covid with an onset before December
15, and therefore presumably was lineage A; but if lineage A were ancestral and the primary
HSM case were lineage B, how did lineage A reach HSM so early?
Furthermore the first two (three) known lineage A cases were both found in close proximity
to HSM. The first case sequenced with lineage A, with onset December 26, lived 2 km south-
southeast of HSM [33]; he got it from his wife, onset December 15, who was presumably also
lineage A. The second case sequenced, onset December 27, was infected while residing at an
unspecified hotel "near" HSM [34].
It is hard to explain the first observed presence of lineage A in close proximity to HSM with
the lab leak explanation above. Whether the origin of sars-cov-2 was zoonotic or laboratory,
it appears that both lineages A and B were located in or near the market, and the best
explanation for the observations is the same for both theories.
60Though the WHO reports Chen as having an onset of Dec 8, this appears to be incorrect.

(no claims extracted for this section)
