5.4.4  Summary of significance of proposal

⟦1⟧ The proposal does not explicitly state it would add furin cleavage sites to viruses, but it
does discuss adding cleavage sites in general shortly after referring to furin cleavage sites by
name.
⟦2*⟧ Most, but not all, of the genetic modification involved using backbones from known, pre-
existing viruses.
⟦3⟧ The proposal does not, as far as I understand, discuss any in vivo genetic modification; all
editing was to be done by directly altering sequences, not by passaging through humanized
mice or other organisms. Viruses would be used in vivo only for testing pathogenecity.
⟦4⟧ The proposal does specifically say it would screen for wild viruses with high affinity towards
human ACE2.
⟦5⟧ Overall, the Project DEFUSE proposal is a bit eerie in how it calls out multiple features that
are quite distinct in sars-cov-2. However these features were previously known or suspected
to be important to human coronaviruses, and the proposal is hardly a blueprint for building
sars-cov-2, containing many irrelevancies and missing key components.
⟦6⟧ Project DEFUSE is most relevant in that it shows that the community of virologists was
broadly interested in making chimeric viruses with certain features which have the potential
for lab leak risk if handled improperly, and not that WIV in specific planned to do a particular
research path that would lead to creating sars-cov-2.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ [ANALYSIS] The proposal's discussion of adding cleavage sites, including furin cleavage sites, implies a potential for creating viruses with increased transmissibility.
⟦2*⟧ [ANALYSIS] The use of backbones from known, pre-existing viruses in genetic modification reduces the likelihood of creating a completely novel virus.
⟦3⟧ [ANALYSIS] The proposal's focus on in vitro genetic editing, rather than in vivo modification, reduces the risk of accidental creation of a highly transmissible virus.
⟦4⟧ [ANALYSIS] Screening for wild viruses with high affinity towards human ACE2 increases the likelihood of identifying viruses with potential for human transmission.
⟦5⟧ [ANALYSIS] The presence of features distinct in SARS-CoV-2 in the Project DEFUSE proposal does not necessarily imply a direct link to the creation of SARS-CoV-2, as these features were previously known to be important for human coronaviruses.
⟦6⟧ [ANALYSIS] The Project DEFUSE proposal indicates a broader interest in the virology community in creating chimeric viruses with certain features, which poses a lab leak risk if handled improperly.

* = fuzzy-matched location (quote not verbatim in the raw text above); position is approximate, snapped to the nearest word boundary
