5.4.1  Excerpts from proposal

I will be omitting quite a few details about irrelevant activities in the proposal. There are
two relevant passages:
We will screen samples for SARSr-CoV [sars-cov-1-related coronavirus]
nucleic acid [...] Full-length genomes or S [spike] genes of all SARSr-
CoVs will be high-throughput sequenced followed by genome walking.
⟦1⟧ We will analyze the S gene for its ability to bind human ACE2 by
Biocore or virus entry assay. Synthesis of Chimeric Novel SARSr-
CoV QS : We will commercially synthesize SARSr-CoV S glycopro-
tein genes, designed for insertion into SHCO14 or WIV16 molecu-
lar clone backbones (88% and 97% S-protein identity to epidemic
SARS-Urbani61). These are BSL-3, not select agents or subject to
P3CO (they use bat SARSr-CoV backbones which are exempt) and
are pathogenic to hACE2 [human ACE2] transgenic mice.
[...] We will conduct in vitro [in test tube] pseudovirus binding assays,
using established techniques, and live virus binding assays (at WIV
to prevent delays and unnecessary dissemination of viral cultures) for
isolated strains.
So, they will look for sars-like viruses, sequence their spike proteins, simulate how well those
spike proteins bind to human ACE2 receptors, and put the genes for those spike proteins
into known viruses which have been selected for their low pandemic potential. Those viruses
will be given to mice with human ACE2 receptors. The proposal goes on to explain that
after evaluating the chimeric viruses, some of them will be verified by testing the original
wild viruses the spikes came from; the latter would be done at WIV where the wild viruses
were originally sampled.
S2 Proteolytic Cleavage and Glycosylation Sites : [...] We will analyze
all SARSr-CoV S [spike] gene sequences for appropriately conserved
proteolytic cleavage sites in S2 [spike subregion 2] and for the pres-
ence of potential furin cleavage sites. SARSr-CoV S with mismatches
in proteolytic cleavage sites can be activated by exogenous trypsin or
cathepsin L. ⟦2*⟧ Where clear mismatches occur, we will introduce appro-
priate human-specific cleavage sites and evaluate growth potential in
Vero [monkey kidney] cells and HAE [human airway epithelial cells]
cultures. In SARS-CoV [ie,⟦3*⟧  sars-cov-1], we will ablate several of these
sites based on pseudotyped particle studies and evaluate the impact
of select SARSr-CoV S changes on virus replication and ⟦4*⟧ pathogenesis.
We will also review deep sequence data for low abundant high risk
SARSr-CoV that encode functional proteolytic cleavage sites, and if
so, introduce these changes into the appropriate high abundant, low
61SARS-Urbani refers to a a reference genome of sars-cov-1, collected from Carlo Urbani. Urbani was a
doctor and biologist who first realized SARS-1 was a new disease, and whose warning to the WHO likely
saved many lives. He died of SARS-1 at age 46.
risk parental strain.
This passage is part of a long list of planned genetic experiments. They will look for cleavage
sites, including furin cleavage sites, in existing cells, and genetically modify some of them to
introduce "human-specific" cleavage sites. It is unclear to me whether furin is human-specific.
I understand this passage to be referring to the chimeric viruses with known backbone
(SHCO14 or WIV16). They also discuss adding cleavage sites to common, low risk sars-like
viruses. After this passage, it goes on to discuss N-linked glycosation.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ [ANALYSIS] The proposal will analyze the S gene for its ability to bind human ACE2 by Biocore or virus entry assay, which will help explain how well the spike proteins bind to human ACE2 receptors.
⟦2*⟧ [ANALYSIS] The introduction of human-specific cleavage sites into SARSr-CoV S genes will affect the growth potential of the viruses in Vero cells and HAE cultures.
⟦3*⟧ [ANALYSIS] The modification of SARSr-CoV S genes to introduce human-specific cleavage sites will help evaluate the impact of select SARSr-CoV S changes on virus replication and pathogenesis.
⟦4*⟧ [ANALYSIS] The comparison of the growth potential of chimeric viruses with and without human-specific cleavage sites will help explain the role of these sites in virus replication and pathogenesis.

* = fuzzy-matched location (quote not verbatim in the raw text above); position is approximate, snapped to the nearest word boundary
