4.5.6  Assessment of Rootclaim's market model

Rootclaim explains the outbreak in HSM preceding outbreaks elsewhere as a consequence
of the infection growth rate in HSM being so much higher as to overcome the head start of
cases elsewhere in Wuhan. For this to be correct requires three unlikely things to happen:
1. One of the first covid patients goes to HSM
2. The first (or one of the first) covid patients to visit HSM infects an HSM resident, and
the infection takes hold as a local cluster
3. The HSM cluster grows so rapidly as to outpace non-HSM cases
It is possible to trade off one of these factors against the others by tweaking the numbers,
but there is no avoiding that at least one of them will be improbable:
1. Assuming 50000 weekly visitors at HSM, and that each sick person is contagious (and
active!) for one week, then for every sick person who visits HSM there are on average
245 sick people in Wuhan who do not; with a more realistic infection period that would
be closer to 500 sick people in Wuhan. We can make the first step reasonably likely
by assuming only the 500th sick person went to Wuhan, but now the non-HSM cases
have a much greater headstart to overcome.
2. Maybe the first sick person to visit HSM was super contagious and got lots of people
sick, but now we have even more non-HSM cases to overcome, as well as needing to
explain the coincidence that the person who happened to visit HSM was also super
contagious. Or maybe all of the pre-HSM cases were super contagious, but then how
did HSM outpace non-HSM? Or maybe it took multiple sick people visiting HSM for
the outbreak to take hold there, but that makes it even more improbable that more
than one of the earliest covid patients happened to go there.
3. This is the mirror image of the previous bullet points. Perhaps non-HSM cases did
not have a big head start, but then it is quite unlikely one of the first non-HSM cases
happened to visit HSM.
No matter how the model is adjusted, for this model to explain the observed cumulative case
numbers at 2019 Dec 31 requires either multiple unlikely events or one especially unlikely
event. This is not due to some simplification or model error, but inherent to the difficulty of
explaining how the first cluster of cases is observed far from the purported origin. When the
2019 cases are broken down by time, the model does even worse at explaining events earlier
in the outbreak; it predicts HSM cases will be heavily backloaded to the end of December;
a week before the end of December, (ascertained) non-HSM cases should outnumber HSM
cases by 8 to 1, and two weeks before by 32 to 1, whereas we instead observe that HSM cases
are slightly frontloaded to earlier in the outbreak. The first HSM case should be ascertained
four doubling times (two weeks) after the first non-HSM case, instead of 6 days before.
I think the maximal likelihood way to make this model consistent with observations is to
suppose that one of the first 5 or 10 covid patients went to HSM and infected a vendor there,
and the HSM outbreak steadily outpaced non-HSM cases. While this requires two quite
unlikely events and one somewhat unlikely event, 55 it allows for a distribution of cases over
time that is largely indistinguishable from one where covid started at HSM.
This can be substantially ameliorated if you believe Connor Reed, or other people, had
covid before the HSM outbreak, but I found no evidence in support of that (see section A.2).
Even a small change like Chen being sick on Dec 8 instead of Dec 16 makes Rootclaim's
model something like 4 times more likely, as it alleviates part of the burden of explaining
the absence of ascertained pre-HSM cases.
We are, however, ignoring one of the biggest difficulties of Rootclaim's model, which is
explaining not only that HSM was the first covid SSE, but by quite a large margin in time.
Even if we accept that one of the first people with covid went to HSM and started an outbreak
there, this does not imply that the other people with covid now disappeared because they
no longer relevant to the story. We know that covid is contagious outside of HSM because
it continued to grow even after HSM was closed. If there are 128 or 245 or 500 sick people
going around Wuhan at the time of the HSM primary case, shouldn't we expect other large
55Somewhere in the ballpark of 1 /100· 1/20· 1/5, not coincidentally very close to the Bayes factor I will
eventually assign in section 7.6 to the outbreak starting in HSM.
SSEs to start popping up in other locations? Why was it another month before the first
trickle of covid cases outside of China (or Wuhan) emerged?

(no claims extracted for this section)
