4.6.2  Correlations between animal DNA and sars-cov-2 positivity

Rootclaim observed ([1] at 2:56:30) that statistical analysis of environmental samples show
no or negative correlation between samples that contain DNA from species such as raccoon
dog and samples that test positive. It would not have occurred to me to perform this
comparison, and I do not think it is useful or relevant.
The animals at HSM were caged and did not have freedom to move about the market.
While there would have been some disease communication between them, particularly within
a single shop, disease communication between animals would presumably have been lower
than between humans at HSM who could and did move between multiple shops and interact
with other humans. I expect that at the time of spillover, very few animals at HSM would
have been carrying sars-cov-2 infections, compared to the number who might be susceptible
to it. (It is quite possible that some would later be infected by humans.)
Any positive correlation between samples that contain raccoon dog DNA and samples that
test for sars-cov-2 would only occur if the samples happened to contain material from the
specific raccoon dogs that were carrying sars-cov-2. There are probably few or no such
samples, so the expected correlation under the zoonotic hypothesis would be weak or zero.
Moreover, there are several species in HSM suspected as being potential sars-cov-2 interme-
diaries (such as raccoon dog, civet, and bamboo rat); presumably only one of them could
have any positive correlation, with the others being zero as they are irrelevant.
Even if there were a positive correlation, it could be overwhelmed by confounding factors.
After the first round of testing appeared to identify the region with live animals as a potential
source of the pandemic, a second round of testing included 10 samples at each of 7 different
shops that sold wildlife [22]. This sampling, two weeks later on January 12, would have
had a lower positivity rate due to the additional time for the sars-cov-2 RNA to decay.
Consequentially this would induce a negative correlation between samples with wildlife and
samples with sars-cov-2.

(no claims extracted for this section)
