7.1  Zoonotic prior

Before the debate I had a fundamental misunderstanding of what drives new pandemics.
Consider Figure 9, which is a subset of known sarbecoviruses most closely related to sars-
cov-2; recall that sarbecoviruses are themselves a branch of betacoronaviruses, which are a
branch of coronaviruses. Conversely, while sars-cov-2 is considered one virus "species", it
can be subdivided endlessly into lineages or strains. This great diversity of viruses is driven
by their high mutation rate (compared to eukaryotes) and genetic recombination.
I therefore had (wrongly) imagined the gamut of viruses as akin to a continuum of possi-
bilities. Spillovers from animals to humans are rare, and when they happen they effectively
sample a random virus from that continuum of viruses that exist in animals. Depending on
the properties of the virus, the spillover could continue to create a pandemic or not.
This is wrong, as if it were true it would be essentially impossible for the "same" virus to
spillover multiple times, like picking random real numbers and getting the same number
Figure 9: Some of the closest known related sarbecoviruses to sars-cov-2, from Wikipedia.
twice. Instead, it appears that (potential) spillover events are quite common, 64 and the
primary limitation on pandemics is not whether the animal-to-human transmission occurs
but rather whether a virus with the necessary properties evolves in an animal population
humans are exposed to. Once such a virus evolves, it easily passes to human hosts, possibly
many times; SARS-1 had multiple known independent spillover events,65 and MERS has had
dozens to hundreds since its discovery in 2012 [11]. 66
We will be using the emergence of previous human coronaviruses to choose a prior P (Z).
⟦1⟧ The multiple spillovers of SARS-1 and MERS are not independent events; since the limiting
factor seems to be the evolution of a suitable virus, not its spillover, these should only count
once each. There are 7 known human coronaviruses, two discovered in the 1960s, and the
rest since 2002. Most of these only cause mild disease, and may have been circulating long
before their discovery; the 1889 pandemic that killed 1 million people may have been the
spillover of hcov-oc43, which today typically causes only colds. SARS-1 and MERS are the
only "sars-like" viruses I consider a suitable precedent, and both emerged in humans since
2002; this would give a rate of 1.5 per 21 years or 1 per 14 years. 67
64According to Peter Daszak of EcoHealth Alliance, more than 1 million people in southeast asia are
exposed to bat coronaviruses each year ([32], annex page 71).
65The US CDC found in 2003 that 13% animal traders in Guangdong, where SARS-1 was discovered, had
antibodies to SARS-1 despite none of them having had known illnesses; the subgroup with highest incidence
was palm civet traders, at 73% (16 out of 22), compared to 1-3% in control groups. This suggests spillover
events are commonplace. [13]
66I infer the paper as implying an estimated 200 spillover events, but it doesn't say so directly, so I might
be misunderstanding.
67What we want to know is the expected gap between consecutive novel coronaviruses; ignoring sars-cov-
2, from 2002 to 2023 there were sars-cov-1 in 2002 and MERS in 2012. We get 1.5 by assuming we are
(on average) half way between MERS and the next novel coronavirus, so there have been 1.5 "gaps" since
We should also consider prior to 2002; but how much prior? ⟦2⟧ I believe the risk of pandemics
has grown greatly on the timescale of decades, due to changes of land use, agricultural
intensity, and population; consider the increasing size and frequency of Ebola outbreaks in
the last 10 to 30 years. If we limit our attention to the last 40 years, under the belief that
outbreaks were less likely to occur or be noticed before then than today, we get an overall
rate of 1 per 20 years. 68
⟦3⟧ Not all sars-like viruses can cause a pandemic. Estimating from sars-cov-1 and MERS we get
a (0 + 1)/(2 + 2) = 1/4 chance (I forget the name of this correction method) of it happening;
and while sars-cov-1 is quite like sars-cov-2 in some ways, the sars-cov-2 virus does seem
uniquely terrible, in part due to its initially very high presymptomatic transmission rate.
Perhaps a less terrible virus would not have lead to a pandemic. On this basis I will add
another factor of 1/2.
Figure 10: Estimated relative risk distribution of emergence of zoonotic infectious diseases.
A large fraction of novel zoonotic diseases are expected to emerge in south or east asia;
in addition to population density, other important factors are "forested tropical regions
experiencing land-use changes and where wildlife biodiversity (mammal species richness) is
high". Figure 3b from [9].
If a new sars-like virus emerges, one expects probably to see it somewhere in east Asia, not
necessarily HSM in specific. Conditioned on the emergence being a wildlife market in east
Asia, Peter gives the probability of HSM as 1 /50 [8]; Saar gives it as 1 /500 [7]. Both sides'
calculation involved naively using the population of Wuhan compared to the population of
China / Asia; ⟦4⟧ but Saar observed that HSM is the largest market of its kind in central China,
so using raw population figures probably yields an underestimate. My vague impression is
that HSM is atypical in the extent of its live wildlife presence. Furthermore, biologist Eddie
sars-cov-1. We don't count a gap before 2002 because we chose 2002 to line up with sars-cov-1. We exclude
sars-cov-2 because we are trying to estimate a prior for its emergence. If you were to include sars-cov-2,
you'd use the interval 2002 to 2019 and so estimate 2 per 17 years; you can't go past 2019 because the timing
of when this analysis is being conducted is influenced by the timing of sars-cov-2.
68Again, we count gaps: there was half a gap before sars-cov-1, half a gap after MERS, and a full gap
between, for 2 gaps in 40 years.
Holmes and the Wuhan CDC specifically called out HSM as a possible location for a future
pandemic spillover [26, 39]. 69 Conversely, pandemics can emerge in locations other than
wildlife markets. In toto I will assess this as 1 /200.
⟦5⟧ (One could also get 1/200 through a very crude calculation like the following: suppose there
is a 50% chance spillover is in China, conditional 50% chance in one of the 10 largest cities
in China, and 20% of the relevant wild animal contact in Wuhan takes place at HSM. This
last figure feels a little high to me. Note that Rootclaim gives a figure of 15% to 30% chance
of the spillover being in HSM conditioned on it being in Wuhan.)
Overall this gives
P (Z) = 1
20· 1
4· 1
2· 1
200 = 1
32000,
which is to say that HSM should produce a pandemic akin to sars-cov-2 every 32000 years.
⟦6⟧ Because the dynamics of flu evolution is fundamentally different than that of coronaviruses,
I do not find flu pandemics/epidemics/outbreaks useful for assessing the prior P (Z).

Claims:
⟦1⟧ [LIMITATION] The emergence of previous human coronaviruses may not be independent events, as the limiting factor seems to be the evolution of a suitable virus, not its spillover.
⟦2⟧ [LIMITATION] The rate of emergence of novel coronaviruses may be affected by changes in land use, agricultural intensity, and population over the last few decades.
⟦3⟧ [LIMITATION] Not all sars-like viruses can cause a pandemic, and estimating the probability of a pandemic from sars-cov-1 and MERS may not be accurate.
⟦4⟧ [LIMITATION] The calculation of the probability of HSM being the location of a pandemic spillover may be an underestimate due to the use of raw population figures.
⟦5⟧ [LIMITATION] The assessment of the probability of HSM being the location of a pandemic spillover is vague and based on crude calculations.
⟦6⟧ [LIMITATION] The dynamics of flu evolution is fundamentally different from that of coronaviruses, which limits the usefulness of flu pandemics/epidemics/outbreaks for assessing the prior P(Z).
