7.2  Lab leak prior

To estimate P (LL), rather than extrapolating from historical lab leak events, I will work
forwards from first principles. ⟦1⟧ This is an error-prone approach, not just because it requires
speculating about the activities and safety of a lab I have no first- or second-hand knowledge
of, but also because any errors introduced are unlikely to cancel out with errors in P (Z).
However this is necessary as I know no analogous precedent for LL.
⟦2⟧ As my numbers are more-or-less conjecture from thin air, I will just give them in tabular
form:
WIV conducts GoF research a la "DEFUSE" 1/50
(annualized) 1/1.7
WIV uses suitable starting virus 1/2
WIV research is successful 1/2
lab leak of that virus occurs at WIV 1/50
The Project DEFUSE research plan [14, 20] looks eerily similar, in parts, to sars-cov-2.
⟦3⟧ However following Project DEFUSE exactly is not consistent with LL. Here are some of the
most important discrepancies:
• Project DEFUSE was a collaboration of multiple research groups; but the more people
involved, the easier for people to become aware of the research
• most of the work, including all work on virus chimeras, was to be done in UNC or
other US labs
69The proper way to include this is to first estimate the chance of spillover at HSM excluding Holmes's
prognostication, second estimate the chance the spillover site would have been successfully forecast (and
applying a Bonferroni correction), then take some sort of average of these two estimates according to your
relative confidence in them.
• the project was planned to last 3.5 years
• the project was interested in viruses related to sars-cov-1
• the project planned on using backbones from previously known viruses, selected for
lack of pandemic potential in humans
⟦4⟧ For LL to occur, WIV had to undertake the contents of Project DEFUSE alone without
collaborators (presumably their former collaborators would know of a falling out between
them?), abandon the idea of using wild viruses closely related to sars-cov-1, use wild back-
bones instead of safe backbones, and rush the project in half the proposed time. It is also
necessary for WIV to keep the elements of the proposal that are in accord with sars-cov-2
without alteration. The only known precedent for activities like this taking place at WIV
is the construction of a chimera of the WIV1 backbone with spike gene collected from wild
viruses; I know of no precedent for WIV inserting FCSs, filtering viruses based on infectivity,
nor using wild-type backbones. I find the probability of all of this to be at most 1/50.
That gives the probability of WIV undertaking the GoF research as described, but we want
an annual risk. ⟦5⟧ Assuming a Poisson distribution of lab leaks with unknown parameter, after
1.7 years the annualized probability of the first lab leak occurring is at most 1 per 1.7 years.
⟦6⟧ Under LL, WIV must find and choose a sufficiently dangerous virus to start with, which at
minimum requires such a virus to exist. Arguably the latter is the same factor of 1 /8 as
fromZ, but I have weakened this to 1/2 as GoF research lowers how dangerous the starting
point would need to be. This assumes that WIV is able to find the virus, though in reality
only a small fraction of wild viruses are ever sampled.
Finally, we estimate the chance of the virus actually escaping. ⟦7⟧ Rootclaim describes this
as almost certainty once sars-cov-2 is manufactured, but I cannot take this seriously when
Rootclaim does not quantify the risk of a outbreak of covid at the lab origin, and suggests
that 128 sick people in Wuhan might lead only to a cluster at HSM. Even supposing WIV
chose not to use a pseudovirus and performed aerosol-generating procedures on the virus
under BSL-2 conditions, is this riskier than having a colleague with covid? However likely it
is for a researcher to get covid from a vial in a fume hood, it seems far more likely to get it
from a fellow researcher - they aren't bringing their BSL-2 equipment out to group dinners.
The chance of a lab leak is surely lower than the chance that leak is followed by a outbreak
in the lab, and Rootclaim finds the latter to be too low to be noteworthy.
⟦8⟧ Also, while lab leaks of infectious agents do happen, they still are very rare, especially if you
restrict to lab leaks that had secondary infections; there are many virology labs, and most
have never experienced a leak. I cannot put the probability above 1 /50; I think it is lower,
and only put it so high as sars-cov-2 is uncommonly contagious.
Putting these together, we get
P (LL) = 1
50· 1
1.7· 1
2· 1
2· 1
50 = 1
17000.
Compared to P (Z), we see P (LL) is twice as high. While zoonotic pandemics are much
more likely than GoF lab leak pandemics globally, the latter tends to happen in Wuhan
more often than the former. ⟦9⟧ My intuition is that the Bayes factor P (LL)/P (Z) = 2 I
calculated is grossly too high.

Claims:
⟦1⟧ [LIMITATION] The approach to estimate P(LL) is error-prone due to lack of knowledge about the lab's activities and safety
⟦2⟧ [LIMITATION] The numbers used in the estimation are conjectural and lack a solid basis
⟦3⟧ [LIMITATION] The estimation of P(LL) does not account for the potential biases and uncertainties in the Project DEFUSE research plan
⟦4⟧ [LIMITATION] The assumption that WIV would undertake the contents of Project DEFUSE alone without collaborators is uncertain
⟦5⟧ [LIMITATION] The estimation of the annualized probability of the first lab leak occurring is based on an unknown parameter
⟦6⟧ [LIMITATION] The probability of WIV finding and choosing a sufficiently dangerous virus to start with is uncertain
⟦7⟧ [LIMITATION] The risk of a lab leak leading to an outbreak is difficult to quantify and may be lower than estimated
⟦8⟧ [LIMITATION] The probability of a lab leak is rare, especially if restricted to lab leaks with secondary infections
⟦9⟧ [LIMITATION] The Bayes factor P(LL)/P(Z) may be grossly too high due to uncertainties in the estimation
